                                                                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics, 2022, 10, 2649-2689
                                                                                               https://www.scirp.org/journal/jamp
                                                                                                           ISSN Online: 2327-4379
                                                                                                             ISSN Print: 2327-4352




The Maximum Ordinality Principle (MOP) and
Its Formal Language, Namely the “Incipient”
Differential Calculus (IDC), Open, and at the
Same Time Offer, A Radically New Perspective
to Modern Science

Corrado Giannantoni

Ente Nazionale per le Energie Alternative, Rome, Italy




How to cite this paper: Giannantoni, C.        Abstract
(2022) The Maximum Ordinality Principle
(MOP) and Its Formal Language, Namely          The aim of the paper, as explicitly indicated by its title, is to show that The
the “Incipient” Differential Calculus (IDC),   Maximum Ordinality Principle (MOP) and its Formal Language, namely The
Open, and at the Same Time Offer, A Rad-       “Incipient” Differential Calculus (IDC), open, and at the same time offer, a
ically New Perspective to Modern Science.
Journal of Applied Mathematics and Phys-       Radically New Perspective to Modern Science. The methodology adopted, in
ics, 10, 2649-2689.                            this respect, is articulated in two parts: 1) firstly, by recalling the general cha-
https://doi.org/10.4236/jamp.2022.109178       racteristics of the Self-Organizing Systems, whose behavior is described by
                                               the Maximum Ordinality Principle and, at the same time, the reasons for the
Received: August 3, 2022
Accepted: September 11, 2022
                                               introduction of a different Formal Language termed as IDC (“Incipient” Dif-
Published: September 14, 2022                  ferential Calculus); 2) afterwards, by comparing the specific properties of the
                                               MOP and IDC, and the Fundamental Differences they introduce in describ-
Copyright © 2022 by author(s) and
                                               ing the surrounding world, with respect to any Scientific Discipline based on
Scientific Research Publishing Inc.
This work is licensed under the Creative
                                               TDC. Self-Organizing Systems, in fact, always show an unexpected “excess”
Commons Attribution International              with respect to their phenomenological premises. An “excess” can be termed
License (CC BY 4.0).                           as Quality (with a capital Q) because it is not a simple “property” of a given
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
                                               phenomenon. In fact, it is never reducible to the usual categories of the Tra-
                Open Access
                                               ditional Science: efficient causality, logical necessity, functional relationships.
                                               Consequently, the description of such an “Emerging Quality” requires new
                                               mental categories (Generative Causality, Adherent Logic, Ordinal Relation-
                                               ships) and, correspondingly, a new Formal Language, termed IDC. The result
                                               of such a comparison is that the New Scientific Perspective, in spite of the
                                               different ways of describing Physical, Biological and Human System, always
                                               remains, by itself, a “com-possible” option with respect to the Traditional
                                               one. The two Perspectives, in fact, are not in contrast between them. They



DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178          Sep. 14, 2022             2649                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni



                                  simply “co-exist”, because of the absence of Perfect Induction in their cor-
                                  responding Logics. However, in spite of the fact that the two Perspectives are
                                  “com-possible” in principle, their differences become significantly “marked”
                                  at the operative level, as shown by the several study cases, analyzed in the
                                  second part of the Paper, in the light of a General Methodology for Strategic
                                  Decisions based on both MOP and IDC. The conclusions thus would (appar-
                                  ently) be that TDC and IDC can be operatively adopted only separately (or, at
                                  the most, both “in parallel”) in order to research for the optimal solutions,
                                  according to their respective operative validity. Without forgetting, however,
                                  that in all cases: 1) TDC “reflects” the presuppositions of the Traditional
                                  Scientific Approach, so that, by itself, it is “self-referential”; 2) IDC, vice versa,
                                  “reflects” the presuppositions of the New Scientific Approach, so that, by itself,
                                  it is “hetero-referential”. In reality, the paper also shows that there exists an ul-
                                  terior possibility, which represents an Over-Conclusion. In fact, in adherence
                                  to the General Methodology for Strategic Decisions presented in the paper,
                                  TDC and IDC can be “seen” as generating a Unique Feed-Back Logical
                                  Process. Like “Two Brothers”, that cooperate between them. Consequently,
                                  and surprisingly, TDC and IDC “reveal” that, in the context of the abovemen-
                                  tioned Logical Structure, they are “nothing but” a unique “casket” of “precious
                                  pearls”.

                                  Keywords
                                  IDC, TDC, Theoretical Com-Possibility, Operative In-Equivalence, Harmonious
                                  Over-Ordinal Com-Possibility



                                1. Introduction
                                In order to show the various aspects anticipated in the Abstract, we will first
                                present the Fundamental Characteristics of the Traditional Scientific Approach
                                and, in parallel, those pertaining to the New Scientific Approach, based on both
                                the Maximum Ordinality Principle (MOP) and the correlative “Incipient” Diffe-
                                rential Calculus (IDC), which, as already anticipated, originate from the analysis
                                of Self-Organizing Systems.

                                2. Fundamental Characteristics of the Two Scientific
                                   Approaches
                                These characteristics, which will be illustrated and analyzed in more detail in the
                                contest of the paper, are here synthetically shown, in parallel, in Table 1. A syn-
                                optic picture that, at the same time, represents both the structure and the syn-
                                thesis of the paper.

                                2.1. Fundamental Characteristics of the Traditional Scientific
                                     Approach
                                Modern Science is characterized by a persistent and progressively ascendancy


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                          2650                 Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                           C. Giannantoni


                          Table 1. Synoptic comparison between the fundamental characteristics of the two Scientific Ap-
                          proaches.




                                    toward ever more general Physical Laws and Principles.
                                      However, before any formulation of a single hypothesis or a physical theory,
                                    Modern Science (let us say, from Newton on) adopts three fundamental pre-sup-
                                    positions (see Table 1): the causality principle (also termed as “efficient causali-
                                    ty”), classical logic (also termed as “necessary logic”), and functional relation-
                                    ships (between the various parts of any System analyzed).
                                      On the basis of such fundamental presuppositions, and only after having de-
                                    veloped a strictly conform consequential Formal Language, that is the Tradi-
                                    tional Differential Calculus (TDC), Modern Science progressively ascends to-
                                    ward ever more general Physical Laws and Principles:
                                      1) from Phenomenological Laws (e.g. Kepler’s Laws); 2) to Physical Laws spe-
                                    cific of each Discipline (e.g. Newton’s Laws, Maxwell’s Equations, etc.); 3) up to
                                    the three well-known Thermodynamic Principles.
                                      Such a progressive development has given origin to a hierarchy of a multiplic-
                                    ity of quantitative Physical Laws and Principles, in particular as a consequence of
                                    the first basic presupposition: the causality principle. This Principle, in fact, has
                                    led Modern Science to introduce “different causes” in different Disciplines. The
                                    Principle of causality, in fact, tends to “sub-divide” the entire phenomenology
                                    (at present known) in different “branches”, precisely because, on the basis of
                                    such a presupposition, it leads Scientists to research for the most “appropriate
                                    causes” pertaining each specific set of phenomena each time considered.
                                      In this way, Modern Science persistently propends to show that: “Every Sys-
                                    tem is a mechanism”. Especially because of its Formal Language adopted.

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                           2651                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                  Such a conclusion, however, although confirmed by experimental results, can
                                be considered as being valid only from an operative point of view, but not from
                                an absolute point of view. This is because “necessary logic” (adopted as a second
                                basic presupposition) does not admit any form of “Perfect Induction” (see Pop-
                                per’s Falsification Principle).
                                  In fact, as synthetically illustrated in Table 1, in the strict contest of “neces-
                                sary logic”:
                                  1) after having formulated a single or more hypotheses (such as in the case of
                                a Theory);
                                  2) after having formalized them in the Formal Language adopted, faithfully
                                conform to the three above-mentioned basic presuppositions;
                                  3) after having drawn the consequential formal conclusions in terms of “ne-
                                cessary” logic;
                                  4) and after having also obtained experimental confirmations of the previous
                                formal conclusions;
                                  5) it is impossible, in any case whatsoever, to assert the uniqueness of the in-
                                verse process. That is: it is impossible to show that the hypotheses adopted are
                                the sole and unique hypotheses capable to explain those experimental results.
                                  This is precisely because of the absence, in “necessary” logic, of any form of
                                perfect induction.
                                  In fact, only in the presence of a perfect induction it would be possible to as-
                                sure the uniqueness of the inverse process and, thus, to transform the adopted
                                hypotheses into an absolute perspective.
                                  This means that Modern Science, precisely because based on necessary logic,
                                should always be “open” to recognize that there always exist many other possible
                                Approaches (in principle infinite) capable to interpret the same experimental
                                results.
                                  At this stage, after having synthetically recalled the basic characteristics of
                                Modern Science, we can now analyze in more detail the fundamental properties
                                of the New Perspective, synthetically indicated in parallel (for a better compari-
                                son) in the right hand side of Table 1.

                                2.2. Fundamental Characteristics of the New Scientific Approach
                                The best way of illustrating such a New Scientific Approach is that of recalling,
                                step by step, its Process of Genesis, synthetically summarized in the second
                                “box” in the right column of Table 1.
                                  Such a Scientific Approach, as already anticipated, originates from the analysis
                                of Self-Organizing Systems.
                                  These Systems and their “emerging properties” began to be studied by L.
                                Boltzmann toward the end of XIX century. Several other Authors (e.g. A. Lotka)
                                successively dealt with such a theme.
                                  L. Boltzmann was in fact the first who attempted at describing Self-Organizing
                                Systems in more appropriate formal terms, by proposing the adoption of a new


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                         2652                Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                                        C. Giannantoni


                                Thermodynamic Principle: “The Principle of Maximum Exergy Inflow to the
                                System” [1].Some years later, A. Lotka reformulated such a Principle in the form
                                of: “The Principle of Maximum Exergy Flow through the System” [2] [3] [4].
                                    Both such attempts, however, were not perfectly successful, because still based
                                on the concept of Exergy, which is a quantity that is strictly pertaining to Clas-
                                sical Thermodynamics. Consequently, it re-proposes the concepts of efficient cau-
                                sality, logical necessity, functional relationships, which are not properly adequate
                                to represent the “Emerging Quality of Self-Organizing Systems”.
                                    Such an expression, in fact, wants to indicate that Self-Organizing Systems al-
                                ways show an unexpected “excess” with respect to their phenomenological pre-
                                mises. So that they usually say: “The Whole is much more than its parts”.
                                    This is precisely the reason why such an “excess” can be termed as Quality,
                                with a capital Q, to point out that it cannot be understood as being a simple
                                “property” of a given phenomenon. This is because it is never reducible to its
                                phenomenological premises in terms of traditional mental categories: efficient
                                causality, logical necessity, functional relationships.
                                   This evidently suggests a radically new gnosiological perspective, which cor-
                                responds to recognize that: There are processes, in Nature, which cannot be con-
                                sidered as being pure “mechanisms”.
                                   This also leads, in adherence, to the adoption of “new mental categories”1 and,
                                correspondently, to the development of a completely new formal language, so
                                that the description of Self-Organizing Systems might result as being faithfully
                                conform to their “Emerging Quality”.
                                    A really new formal language only appears with H. T. Odum, with the genial
                                introduction of Emergy (Em), defined as Exergy (Ex) by Transformity (Tr) [5]
                                [6] [7]
                                                                            Em
                                                                             = Ex ⋅ Tr                                                (1)
                                    Such a definition clearly shows that Emergy is still based on “Exergy”. How-
                                ever:
                                    1) Quality Factor Tr “Transforms” Ex into a new physical quantity: Emergy.
                                    2) The latter in fact is not defined in “functional terms”, but only by “assigna-
                                tion Rules” [8].
                                    3) This is precisely because Tr is expressed by means of a non-conservative
                                Algebra (ib.).
                                    4) Thus the output “excess” of the three Fundamental Processes (Co-Production,
                                Inter-Action, Feed-Back) is always understood as being “irreducible” to its cor-
                                1
                                 These “new mental categories” can no longer be termed as “pre-suppositions”, because they are not
                                defined “a priori” (as in the case of Traditional Approach). In fact, they are chosen only “a posteri-
                                ori”, on the basis of the “Emerging Quality” previously recognized. “Generative Causality”, in fact,
                                refers to the capacity of a Self-Organizing System to manifest an “irreducible excess”; “Adherent Log-
                                ic”, correspondently, refers to the capacity of our mind to draw “emerging conclusions”. That is, “con-
                                clusions” whose information content is much higher than the information content corresponding to
                                their logical premises, although persistently “adherent” to the latter. “Ordinal Relationships”, in
                                turn, refer to particular relationships of genetic nature, which will be illustrated in more details later
                                on, in the case of a Co-Production Process.


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                            2653                         Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                relative inputs in mere functional terms.
                                    This means that Emergy is able to represent the “Emerging Quality” of Self-
                                Organizing Processes.
                                    This is why Prof. Odum, on the basis of such a concept of Emergy, enunciated
                                the Maximum Em-Power Principle [5] [6] [7], which asserts that: “All self-or-
                                ganizing systems tend to maximize their rates of Emergy use or Empower, and
                                those systems that maximize Empower will prevail” (Odum, 1988, Odum, 1996)
                                [9] [10].
                                    As a direct corresponding consequence, Prof. Odum proposed such a Prin-
                                ciple as the Fourth Thermodynamic Principle, to be understood, however, in
                                terms of Thermodynamics of Quality.
                                  This is precisely because the general enunciation of the Maximum Em-Power
                                Principle, given at a phenomenological level, can directly be referred, as a cor-
                                responding tendency, to the “Emerging Quality” of Self-Organizing Systems.
                                    However, in spite of such valid bases, the Maximum Em-Power Principle had
                                not received a Mathematical Formulation corresponding to its general enuncia-
                                tion, and this, for years, has prevented from considering such a Principle as a
                                possible Fourth Thermodynamic Principle “of Quality”, as Prof. Odum usually
                                asserted.
                                   On the other hand, such a Mathematical Formulation could not be given in
                                terms of the Traditional Differential Calculus, because traditional derivatives, as a
                                consequence of their conceptual basic presuppositions (see Table 1), are not prop-
                                erly apt at representing the “generative” behavior on behalf of “Self-Organizing
                                Systems”.
                                    At this stage, it is then worth synthetically recalling, in the next paragraphs,
                                the logical and historical steps of the process that led us to the Mathematical
                                Formulation of the Maximum Em-Power Principle (MEmPP) and, some years
                                later, to its more general Mathematical Formulation, as the “Maximum Ordinal-
                                ity Principle” (MOP), substantially based on the introduction of a new concept
                                of Derivative: the “Incipient” Derivative.

                                3. Historical Presuppositions of the Mathematical
                                   Formulation of the Maximum Em-Power Principle
                                As a simple introduction I would like to recall that I “became aware” of the “ex-
                                istence” of Self-Organizing Systems only in 1993, by reading a scientific paper
                                prepared for an official publication2, sent to me by Prof. Sergio Ulgiati (Univer-
                                sity of Siena).
                                    In fact, during my personal scientific training as a Nuclear Engineer, I had
                                never heard of “Self-Organizing Systems” and, contextually, of the possibility of
                                their description by means of a new physical quantity termed as “Emergy”.
                                    Nonetheless, I was favorably surprised of that and, during the following months
                                2
                                 Ulgiati S., Odum H. T., Bastianoni S. Emergy use, environmental loading and sustainability. An
                                emergy analysis of Italy. Ecological Modeling 73 (1994) 215-268 (received 9 December 1992, accepted
                                10 August 1993).


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                           2654                      Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                       C. Giannantoni


                                I had several email contacts with Prof. Sergio Ulgiati (first author of the paper),
                                whom I continuously asked for additional documents to better understand the
                                logical and physical formal origin of such a new physical concept, its rigorous
                                definition, together with the concept of Self-Organizing Systems.
                                  In this respect, I want to thank Prof. Ulgiati for his willingness to deal with
                                such a fastidious interlocutor.
                                  In fact, what first impressed me was the special Algebra adopted (termed as
                                “Emergy Algebra”), which was very different from the traditional one, but at the
                                same time so “similar” (in a certain sense) to the Differential Fractional Calculus
                                I had begun to study six years before. In fact, the first time I met Prof. Ulgiati, I
                                did not miss the opportunity of asking him: “Why don’t you adopt Fractional
                                Calculus in Emergy Analysis?”
                                  Some weeks later Prof. Ulgiati invited me to attend a special course on Emer-
                                gy Analysis given by Prof. Mark T. Brown in Siena (September 1993), during
                                which I had the opportunity of meeting another extremely important person in
                                my life. My collaboration with Prof. Brown, in fact, started precisely there, in
                                Siena: together we prepared a general scheme which reproduced, by means of
                                the special System Diagrams adopted in Emergy Analysis, the Italian Energy
                                Supply System in terms of Thermodynamics, Economics and Rights (Norms and
                                Laws), which was successively presented at the International Workshop of Porto
                                Venere in 1998 [11].
                                  I must also thank Prof. Brown, in a particular way, because he encouraged my
                                attempts at introducing the “mathematically Equivalent Source Terms” in Emer-
                                gy Algebra, which represented one of the fundamental steps for the successive
                                mathematical formulation of the Maximum Em-Power Principle.
                                  In May 24, 1995 I personally met Prof. Howard T. Odum, who had been in-
                                vited by our ENEA’s Energy Savings Division to give two Lectures (in reality two
                                splendid Lectures) at ENEA’s Headquarters. On that occasion Prof. Odum was
                                so kind as to spend the whole following day with me (in the presence of his Lady
                                Prof. Elisabeth Odum and Prof. Ulgiati), answering my questions, dissolving my
                                doubts, and suggesting possible new lines of research.
                                  I cannot fail to mention that, among other things, he also gave me five of his
                                most famous books as a present.
                                  At the end of that day, after having experienced such a profound willingness
                                shown by Prof. Odum, I frankly expressed my perplexity about the Maximum
                                Em-Power Principle when termed as “Thermodynamic” Principle. In fact, I ob-
                                served, without a general Mathematical Formulation of such a Principle it is ra-
                                ther difficult to decide whether the Maximum Em-Power Principle is a “Ther-
                                modynamic” Principle or not.
                                  Prof. Odum, with a sweet and delicate smile, promptly answered: “You should
                                do it”. “In fact I agree with you, and I believe you can succeed in this task”.
                                  That hope, so openly manifested by Prof. Odum, indelibly marked the “offi-
                                cial birth” of my research for a Mathematical Formulation of the Maximum

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                        2655                  Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                Em-Power Principle.
                                  For years, in fact, his paternal look encouraged me in this difficult task. His
                                faithful invitation sustained me especially when the major difficulties arose, dur-
                                ing the successive stages of the formulation.
                                  Thank you Prof. Odum. Such a Mathematical Formulation is more your merit
                                than mine. Without your sweet smile and your paternal trusting invitation, I
                                would have never found the courage to face such a hard task.

                                4. Mathematical Formulation of the Maximum
                                   Em-Power Principle
                                The Mathematical Formulation of the Maximum Em-Power Principle was given
                                in 2001, and it was contextually presented at the 2nd Biennial Emergy Conference
                                (September 20-22, 2001), [12].
                                  The Mathematical Formulation is here synthetically reproduced
                                                                d
                                               ∫ Γϕ v d         emv d3V → Max , ∀D ( t ) ⊆ SU ( t )  ∗

                                                           dt ∫
                                                        ∗                      ∗
                                                  =     3V                                                                (2)
                                             D∗ ( t )               D∗ ( t )


                                which faithfully translates in formal terms its corresponding verbal enunciation:
                                “Every System tends to organize its internal structure to generate progressively
                                increasing spring-Emergy levels in order to maximize the flow of processed (or
                                “useful”) Emergy”.
                                  In Equation (2) in fact:
                                  ϕv∗ = the “equivalent” Source Term per unit volume.
                                  Γ = the local structural amplification and re-normalization factor (corres-
                                ponding to the product of the coefficients γ k∗ and γ k in the case of discrete
                                form), which also accounts for the structural variations with time.
                                                                emv∗ = emv , m + emv+, q + emv+, w                        (3)

                                where
                                   emv , m = C ⋅ ρ ⋅ ex is the Emergy per unit volume associated to the mass (thus
                                transportable by mass flows).
                                   emv+, q = the Emergy per unit volume associated to heat source terms.
                                   emv+, w = the Emergy per unit volume associated to work source terms.
                                  In this way, the formulation is valid for any Domain ( D∗ ) belonging to Uni-
                                versal Space ( SU ( t ) ).
                                  Additional details about such a formulation can be found in the paper pre-
                                sented at the 2nd Biennial Emergy Conference [ib.], which is also directly availa-
                                ble on the Author’s website http://www.ordinality.org/ and, even more, in the
                                book titled “The Maximum Em-Power Principle as the basis for Thermodynam-
                                ics of Quality” [13].
                                  In fact, at the end of the 2nd Emergy Conference, Prof. Odum, who had appre-
                                ciated such a formulation, invited me to write a book, that was effectively pub-
                                lished the year after (2002).
                                  In the preface of this book Prof. Mark Brown, after having pointed out the ba-

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                           2656                       Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                        C. Giannantoni


                                sic characteristics of the book and the correlative fundamental results achieved,
                                explicitly mention two aspects:
                                  a) “The Center for Environmental Policy, through a generous gift from H.T.
                                Odum has made funds available to help with the book’s publication”; b) “Un-
                                fortunately, Odum died on September 11, 2002, before the publication of this
                                book. During his last months, we discussed this work, and his feeling was that it
                                represents a major contribution to the field, and that it was a very important
                                next step in the formulation of his life work”.

                                5. The Fundamental Results Presented in the Book on the
                                   Maximum Em-Power Principle
                                The Fundamental results presented in the book can be synthesized as follows:
                                • The First Principle of Thermodynamics, The Second Principle of Thermody-
                                   namics, The Third Principle of Thermodynamics, together with The Mini-
                                   mum Action Principle have been reconsidered in the light of The Maximum
                                   Em-Power Principle.
                                • Such a Process has clearly shown that all these Principles can be “obtained”
                                   from The Maximum Em-Power Principle. However, not by “deduction”, but
                                   only by “reduction”.
                                  These results thus confirm, sustain and reinforce Odum’s assertion that The
                                Maximum Em-Power Principle has to be considered as The Fourth Thermody-
                                namic Principle. However, not in terms of quantity, but in terms of Quality.

                                6. Subsequent Researches on the Maximum Em-Power
                                   Principle in the Years 2003-2009
                                All the researches pertaining to this period were essentially devoted to two dif-
                                ferent lines of research, analyzed in parallel, however strictly related:
                                   A. The Relevance of The Maximum Em-Power Principle in several scientific
                                fields.
                                   B. The research for a more general formulation of the Rules of Emergy Alge-
                                bra as Generative Rules.
                                  As far as the results pertaining to point A), apart from that published by Ap-
                                plied Mathematics [14], and those presented at the various Biennial Emergy
                                Conferences [15] [16] [17], they were synthesized in two books (in Italian), titled
                                “Lightness of Quality” (2007) [18] and “Ascendency of Quality” (2008) [19], re-
                                spectively.
                                  The first book presented the novelties introduced by The Maximum Em-Power
                                Principle in the various Scientific Felds listed at column 1 of the following Table
                                2, while the second book presented the correlative novelties in the fields listed at
                                column 2.
                                  At the same time, in parallel (sometimes also contextually) to the abovemen-
                                tioned line of research, a particular attention was persistently devoted to a possible



DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                        2657                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                Table 2. Scientific Fields in which the MEmPP shows its Relevance.

                                         “Lightness” of Quality                    “Ascendency” of Quality

                                           Classical Mechanics                         Electromagnetism
                                         Relativistic Mechanics                       Inorganic Chemistry
                                          Quantum Mechanics                            Organic Chemistry
                                                                                      Biological Chemistry
                                                                                       Molecular Biology
                                                                                      Ontogenetic Biology
                                                                                      Phylogenetic Biology
                                                                                           Cosmology


                                improvement of the Formal Language adopted in the MEmPP, as it will be illu-
                                strated in the next paragraph.

                                7. The Research for a More Appropriate “Formal Language”
                                   in the Context of the MEmPP
                                Such a research was mainly focused on the cases in which The Maximum Em-
                                Power Principle is adopted in order to describe a given System under transient
                                conditions (see previous References [14] [15] [16] [17]).
                                  This is because Emergy is an “Emerging Property” of Self-Organizing Systems.
                                Consequently, when the System is analyzed under steady state conditions, the
                                Rules of Emergy Algebra are faithfully accounted for by the Mathematical For-
                                mulation of the Maximum Em-Power Principle.
                                  Under transient conditions, however, the adoption of the Traditional Diffe-
                                rential Calculus (TDC) tends to “filter”, in a more or less marked measure, the
                                “Emerging Properties” of the System described by the concept of Emergy.
                                  This is because the correlative Non-Conservative Algebra manifests that “Emer-
                                gy” is an “Emerging Property” of Self-Organizing Systems, which cannot be ex-
                                pressed in terms of the traditional mental categories, typical of the Traditional
                                Differential Calculus (TDC): efficient causality, logical necessity, functional rela-
                                tionships. Consequently, the “Emerging Properties” of the System cannot be de-
                                scribed in terms of the traditional derivatives that, at the level of formal lan-
                                guage, represent the perfect reflex of such “a priori” mental categories.
                                   This evidently suggests the adoption of a Different Formal Language, so that
                                the description of Self-Organizing Systems, by means of the Mathematical For-
                                mulation of the Maximum Em-Power Principle, could possibly result as being
                                faithfully conform to their “Emerging Quality”.
                                   This is why the adoption of a new concept of derivative, the “Incipient Deriv-
                                ative”, already developed during a couple of years before, as a possible contribu-
                                tion to a further development of the Fractional Calculus [20] [21] [22] and, for
                                completeness, contextually presented in Appendix 9 of the book devoted to Ma-
                                thematical Formulation of the Maximum Ordinality Principle [13].

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                        2658                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                                C. Giannantoni


                                  The introduction of a new concept of derivative, in fact, is suggested by the
                                same formulation (2). This is because the presence (in it) of the sign (=) and that
                                of the symbol of the traditional first order derivative, ends up by “describing” a
                                “necessary” relationship between “efficient causes” (first member) and “conse-
                                quential effects” (second member), while, in a context of Quality, we should only
                                speak of “generative causes” and consequential “adherent effects”.
                                  This suggests that the same formulation (2) should be thought of as better
                                written as follows
                                                              →   d
                                                                 ∫ emv d3V → Max , ∀D ( t ) ⊆ SU ( t )
                                                                                                  ∗
                                                ∫ Γϕ
                                                       ∗                        ∗
                                                   = v d 3V                                                                (4)
                                               ∗
                                              D (t )
                                                            d t        ∗
                                                                       D (t )


                                                     d
                                where the symbol         represents the already mentioned “incipient” derivative
                                                     
                                                     dt
                                and the symbol “ [→ ” represents either a logical consequence (second side) which
                                is “adherent” to its premises (first side) or physical effects (second side) which
                                are “adherent” to their “spring” causes (first side), or both.
                                  Such a new formulation does not change, by itself, the quantitative aspects
                                pertaining to the M. Em-P. Principle as formulated in Equation (2), because
                                such a Mathematical Formulation only makes use of the first order derivative
                                (see next par. 7.1).
                                  In reality, such a formal-logical passage from an a posteriori mathematical
                                description to a mathematical description conceived of as being “incipient” (that
                                is capable of “following” the Emerging Quality in its continuous Process of Ge-
                                nesis) represents one of the most important aspects concerning the Mathemati-
                                cal Formulation of the M. Em-P. Principle.

                                7.1. Definition of the “Incipient” Derivative of Ordinality q

                                Such a new concept of “Incipient Derivative” is defined as follows
                                                                                     q
                                                    d 
                                                          q                  ~ 
                                                                              δ −1
                                                      f ( t ) =  Lim+    f ( t ) for q = m n
                                                                                                                          (5)
                                                                   ∆t :0 → 0  ∆t 
                                                    dt                           
                                in which the sequence of the symbols is now interpreted according to the direct
                                priority of the order of the three elements that constitute its definition (that is
                                from left to right).
                                   It is precisely such an inversion of “reading” that which transforms a “func-
                                tional” definition into a “generative” definition.
                                  Definition (5) in fact, as more widely illustrated both in the previously men-
                                tioned References [20] [21] [22] and, especially in [14] [15], clearly shows that
                                the “Incipient Derivative” is not an “operator”, like the derivative ( d dt ), that
                                describes “necessary” processes according to the Traditional Differential Calcu-
                                lus (TDC).
                                  The “Incipient Derivative”, vice versa, could properly be termed as a “genera-
                                tor”, because it describes a Generative Process, in its same act of being born, and

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                          2659                         Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                this will represent the fundamental basis of the Mathematical Formulation of the
                                Maximum Ordinality Principle [23], dealt with at par. 9.
                                  Consequently:
                                  1) The three symbols adopted acquire a completely different meaning with
                                respect to the traditional ones.
                                  2) Mainly because they do not represent “three” distinct operations, but a
                                unique and sole Generative Process.
                                   3) The symbol Lim  , in fact, whose etymological origin comes from the Latin
                                word “Limen” (which means a “threshold”), represents the “threshold” of that
                                “ideal window” from which we observe and describe the considered Generative
                                Process, in its same act of being born.
                                   4) The symbol ∆ t : 0 → 0+ now indicates not only the initial time of our reg-
                                istration, but also the proper “origin” (in its etymological sense) of something
                                new which we observe (and describe) in its proper act of being born.
                                   5) It is then evident that the “operator” δ now registers the variation of the
                                observed property f ( t ) , not only in terms of quantity, but also, and especially,
                                in terms of Quality (as the symbol “tilde” would expressly remind). Thus the ra-
                                tio which appears in Equation (5) indicates not only a quantitative variation in
                                time, but both the variation in Quality and quantity.
                                  6) Consequently, when we take the incipient (or “prior”) derivative of Ordi-
                                nality q of any f ( t ) , the generative Exit of such a process will keep “memo-
                                ry” of its genetic origin because it will result as being structured according the
                                indication of such an exponent. The latter in fact is properly termed as Ordinal-
                                ity, because it precisely expresses “how each part of the output is genetically Or-
                                dered to the Whole and, at the same time, how each part is related to all the oth-
                                ers in terms of Ordinal Relationships”.
                                   7) In this way the “Incipient” Derivative represents the Generativity of the
                                considered Process, that is the output “Excess” (per unit time) characterized by
                                both its Ordinality and its related cardinality, while the sequence of the symbols,
                                in definition (Equation (5)), can be interpreted as representing a unique in-
                                ter-action process between the three correlative concepts.
                                  8) The above-mentioned aspects clearly show why the “Incipient” Derivative
                                is able to unify (and, at the same time, to specify) the description of the various
                                Self-Organizing Processes, understood as the Exit of their Generative Nature.
                                  9) This also means that the “Incipient” Derivative presents an Exit that is
                                generally different from the “result” of the corresponding derivative in TDC,
                                even when its Ordinality is reduced to a mere cardinality. For example, the tra-
                                ditional derivative of order n of the function eα ( t ) , evaluated according to Faà
                                di Bruno’s Formula [24], and the corresponding “Incipient” Derivative, respec-
                                tively give
                                                                                                       kn
                                          n
                                    d  α (t )  α (t )        n!
                                                                              k1
                                                                         α   α 
                                                                                       k2
                                                                                           α (n) 
                                   =     e     e ∑                    ⋅                                  (5.1)
                                   
                                    dt                k1 ! k2 ! kn !  1!   2!       n ! 
                                                                                                 


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                        2660                  Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                                C. Giannantoni


                                and
                                                                       n
                                                                 d  α ( t ) ∗ α ( t )    n
                                                                   e= e ⋅ α ( t )                                   (5.2)
                                                                 dt                       
                                        
                                where α ( t ) represents the first order “Incipient” Derivative. And even if they
                                in some cases coincide (for instance when α ( t ) is linear), such a “coincidence”
                                                                                    ∗
                                has to be seen in the light of the symbol = in Equation (5.2), which reminds us
                                that any “Incipient” Derivative is always the Exit of a Generative Logical Process
                                and not of a necessary logical process.

                                7.2. The Rules of Emergy Algebra Formulated in Terms of the
                                    “Incipient” Derivative
                                The first fundamental attempt at adopting such a new form of Derivative was
                                obviously focused on the possible reformulation of the Rules of Emergy Algebra
                                in “incipient” differential terms. That is, in terms of the “Incipient” Derivative,
                                when the latter is characterized by an appropriate Ordinality.
                                  In this case, the Rules of Emergy Algebra can be reformulated as “Generative
                                Rules” in Transient Conditions as follows (see [14] [15] [16]), now re-written
                                with reference to the exponential function eα ( t ) , because they can be referred to
                                any function f ( t ) , and thus they can always be written in such an exponential
                                form:
                                  An Inter-action Process can be represented by a “duet” Ordinal Relationship:
                                                                  2
                                                      d  α ( t )            
                                                                                           α (t )
                                                       e
                                                     =              α1 ( t ) , α 2 ( t )  ⋅ e                            (6)
                                                      dt                               

                                where the brackets { } stand for a Whole. In fact, it is like a “Singing Duet”, whose
                                “Exit” is much more than the “sum” of the contributions of the two singers.
                                  A Co-production Process can be represented by a “binary” Ordinal Relation-
                                ship:
                                                                       1
                                                                                           
                                                                 d  2 α ( t ) α1 ( t )  α ( t )
                                                                  e
                                                                     =                     ⋅e                           (7)
                                                                 dt             α 2 ( t ) 
                                                                                            
                                  It is like the Generation of “Two Brothers”, related between them by Ordinal
                                Relationships of Generative Nature.
                                  In fact, “brothers” are termed as such not because of their “direct reciprocal
                                relationships” (that is, because they love each other, they respect each other, etc.),
                                but because of their direct reference to the same genetic principle: their father
                                (or their mother or both).
                                  A Feed-back Process can be represented by a “duet-binary” Ordinal Relationship:
                                                   2        
                                                                                
                                             d  2 α ( t ) α1 ( t )  α 2 ( t )  α ( t )
                                            =
                                                  e                  ,
                                                                                    ⋅ e                               (8)
                                             dt             α 2 ( t )  α1 ( t ) 
                                                                                  


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                        2661                           Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                that is, as “Two Brothers” that always cooperate between them, and always in the
                                form of a “singing Duet”, even in both (possible) cases of their inverted “role of
                                priority”.
                                                                                                   
                                  Contextually, in all the previous equations α ( t ) always represents the first
                                order incipient derivative of α ( t ) .
                                   It is then easy to recognize that, while the left hand sides of the previous equa-
                                                                                                             (     )
                                                                                                         q
                                tions have an identical formal structure, always in the form d d t , where q
                                indicates the Ordinality of the specific Generative Process (i.e. 2 , 1 2 , 2 2
                                respectively), the right hand sides of Equations (6)-(8) represent, in “formal
                                terms”, the specific Ordinal Structure of an Inter-action, a Co-production and a
                                Feed-back Process, respectively, according to what previously said at paragraph
                                7.1 (in particular items vi) and vii)), with reference to the components of each
                                system, which, in these cases, are always 2 in number.
                                  In such a way, the Rules of non-conservative Emergy Algebra have their direct
                                correspondence with the three Generative Processes characterized by their spe-
                                cific Ordinalities ( 2 , 1 2 , 2 2 , respectively), where the latter, apart from their
                                formal expression and the “tilde” notation, always indicate that the number of
                                components of each Generative Process equals 2.
                                                                                        q              
                                                                                d 
                                  This suggested that the Incipient Derivative   (Equation (4)) could
                                                                                d t 
                                represent an appropriate Mathematical Concept in order to express the Genera-
                                tive Activity of any Self-Organizing System.
                                  In fact, the Rules of Emergy Algebra, reformulated in terms of the “Incipient”
                                Derivative, could represent a valid basis for a possible generalization of the de-
                                scription of any System, made up of an arbitrary number of components.

                                8. Toward a Mathematical Formulation of the Maximum
                                   Ordinality Principle
                                As is well known, the Rules of Emegy Algebra refer to different possible Interac-
                                tions between two sole sub-Systems and, as previously shown, they can all be
                                represented in the general form

                                                                         ( d d t ) {r}
                                                                                   k l
                                                                                                                              (9)
                                                                                   s


                                where k l stands for 2 , 1 2 , 2 2 , while {r} is the Relational Space of the
                                considered System, which in Equations (6)-(8) is represented by eα ( t ) . This then
                                suggests that is also possible to generalize such a description to a more articu-
                                lated System, made up of an arbitrary number of sub-Systems. For example, it is
                                possible to write

                                                               ( d d t )(   )
                                                                                  {e ( ) } = { 0}
                                                                           11
                                                                          11                 [→
                                                                                       α t
                                                                                                                            (10)
                                                                          s


                                which, as we will immediately see, it can represent the Evolution of the Solar
                                System, even in explicit terms (as it will be shown later on), precisely because its


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                         2662                             Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                            C. Giannantoni


                                description is formulated in terms of an “Incipient” derivative of a specific Or-
                                dinality.
                                  In fact, the number 11 can refer to the number of the bodies in the Solar Sys-
                                                                                                       [→
                                tems, that is: Sun + 9 Planets + asteroid belt, while the symbol = 0       { } indicates
                                that the Solar System, during its time evolution, is always adherent to its initial
                                and habitat conditions.
                                  Equation (10) can then represent the Mathematical Formulation of the Max-
                                imum Ordinality Principle [23], with specific reference to the Solar System. In
                                fact, when formulated in this way, it allowed us to solve several problems that,
                                up to now, are still considered as being unsolvable in Classical Mechanics. For
                                example:
                                  a) The distribution of the Planets in the Solar System
                                  Such distribution, in fact, is still only approximately described by the semi-
                                empirical Bode’s Law (1778), which, however, has never found a physical foun-
                                dation, neither in Classical Mechanics nor in General Relativity. Even less, it is
                                the result of a Mathematical “Explicit Solution”, because the dynamic descrip-
                                tion of the Solar System is, by itself, intrinsically unsolvable. In fact, the problem,
                                as demonstrated by H. Poincaré in 1889 [25], is intrinsically unsolvable even if
                                the System is made up of three sole bodies.
                                  Vice versa, if the Solar System is modeled as a Self-Organizing System ac-
                                cording to Equation (10), the distribution of the Planets can easily be obtained as
                                the Explicit Solution to the same Equation (10), which can also easily evaluated
                                on the basis on an “Emerging Quality Simulator” (EQS), formally shown in [26].
                                A Simulator that translates, in operative terms, the Maximum Ordinality Prin-
                                ciple and, in particular, the Harmony Relationships of the same Maximum Or-
                                dinality Principle, which are illustrated in detail in Appendix 1.
                                  The corresponding results are represented in Table 3, where it is also possible
                                to recognize the improvement of the description when the Solar System is more

                                Table 3. Distribution of the planets in the solar system.

                                 Planets    Bode’s Law     Astronomic Data       “Isolated” System    System + Habitat
                                 Mercury      0.4 AU            0.39 AU                     0.39              0.39
                                  Venus       0.7 AU            0.72 AU                     0.6               0.70
                                  Earth       1.0 AU            1.00 AU                     0.9               0.98
                                  Mars        1.6 AU            1.52 AU                     1.4               1.50
                                  Ceres       2.8 AU            2.77 AU                     2.5               2.74
                                  Jupiter     5.2 AU            5.20 AU                     4.7               5.05
                                  Saturn      10.0 AU           9.54 AU                     8.0               9.50
                                 Uranus       19.6 AU           19.2 AU                     16.0              19.0
                                 Neptune      38.8 AU           30.1 AU                     24.0              28.9
                                  Pluto                         39.5 AU                     34.0              38.0


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                           2663                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                appropriately considered in relation with its proper Habitat. That is, when it is
                                understood as a part of our Galaxy [27] (cap. 3).
                                  b) The azimuthal angular distribution of the planetary orbital planes with re-
                                spect to the Ecliptic
                                  This phenomenon also has never found a satisfactory explanation, neither in
                                Classical Mechanics nor in General Relativity. The main reason fundamentally
                                depends on the fact that, in the absence of any explicit solution to the “Three-
                                body Problem”, it is impossible to evaluate the exact influence between the reci-
                                procal orbits of the Planets.
                                  The various angles of the orbital planes, in fact, are distributed in a cone of a
                                rather large width (20˚), which reduces to 10˚ only if the extreme Planets (Nep-
                                tune and Pluto) are “excluded” (because the latter are usually considered as be-
                                ing rather “anomalous”) (ib.).
                                  c) Precessions of the Planets
                                  The Maximum Ordinality Principle is also able to describe another “Irreduci-
                                ble Excess” concerning the Solar System: The Precessions of the Planets (ib.).
                                  General Relativity, in fact, which has given a preliminary answer to this phe-
                                nomenology, asserts that their values are always “constant” in time and they can
                                be evaluated in terms of a direct interaction between two sole celestial bodies,
                                such as in the case of Sun and Mercury.
                                  The MOP, on the contrary, shows that the Precession of any Planet is not
                                “constant” in time and it has to be considered in the context of the Solar System
                                understood as a Whole, that is, when modeled as one sole “Self-Organizing Sys-
                                tem” (ib.).
                                  On the basis of the Example of the Solar System, and the previous concept of
                                “Incipient” Derivative, we gave the General Mathematical Formulation of the
                                Maximum Ordinality Principle, which will be presented at the next paragraph 8,
                                which was also adopted in several other fields of Analysis shown here below.
                                  The MOP, in fact, do not “restrict” its valid applicability to the sole Solar Sys-
                                tem. It is also able to give an elegant solution to several other problems (unsolv-
                                able, intractable or both, as those shown in Table 4) concerning both non-Living
                                Systems, Living Systems, and “Thinking” Systems (that is Human Systems), the
                                majority of them dealt with as specific sections in [28] and [29].
                                  At this stage it is then worth presenting the General Mathematical Formulation
                                of the Maximum Ordinality Principle, enunciated for the first time in 2010 [23].

                                9. Mathematical Formulation of the Maximum Ordinality
                                   Principle
                                Such a Formulation, as already anticipated, always leads to Explicit Solutions, as
                                clearly shown in [27].

                                9.1. First Fundamental Equation of the Maximum Ordinality Principle
                                The First Fundamental Equation is formulated as follows

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                           2664               Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                                                               C. Giannantoni


Table 4.Adoption of the MOP in other fields of analysis.

Non-Living Systems                               Living Systems                                        Conscious Systems (Human Systems)

i) The “Three-Body Problem”. Specific           i) Protein Folding. One of the                         i) The Three-good two-factor Problem in
   section in [28]                                 most intractable problems in                           Economics [36], also dealt with as a specific
ii) The azimuthal angular distribution of the      Biology [32]                                           section in [29]
   planetary orbital planes with respect to the ii) Protein-Protein Interaction.                       ii) The research for equilibrium conditions in a
   Ecliptic. Specific section in [28]           An analogous intractable                                  free-market economy. Specific section in [29]
iii) Precessions of the Planets. Specific           problem as the previous case                       iii) The Stability of Smart Grids [37], also dealt
   section in [28]                                  [33]                                                  with as a specific section in [29]
iv) The angular velocities of the Stars in a iii) The Duchenne Muscular                                iv) Inter-Actions between Man and the
   Galaxy, without “Dark Energy” and “Dark Dystrophyn (DMD) [34] [35]                                     Environment (for example, The
   Matter” [30]                              iv) New oncological therapies.                                “unexplained” sea level rise over the period
v) “The Accelerated Expansion of the                The immune-targeted                                    1900-2000, dealt with as a specific section in
   Universe, in the light of the Maximum            therapies. As a pecific section                        [29])
   Ordinality Principle, in the absence of          in [29]
   “Dark Energy” and “Dark Matter” [31]


                                                                                                                          [→
                                                                                        ( d d t )
                                                                                                       ( m n )
                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                   {r} = { 0}                         (11)

                                                                       ( m n ) → Max → { 2 2} ↑ { N N }                                          (11.1)

                                            where {r} is the Relational Space of the System under consideration, while
                                            ( m n ) represents its corresponding Ordinality, characterized by m Ordinal
                                            Interactions and n Ordinal Co-productions, which reaches its maximum when
                                                      { } {             }
                                            it equals 2 2 ↑ N N (as indicated in Equation (11.1)).
                                              In this respect, it is worth noting that:
                                                                                    (          )
                                              i) The underlined symbol d d t explicitly indicates that the Generative Ca-
                                                                                                   s
                                            pacity of the System (more appropriately termed as Generativity) is “internal” to
                                            the same System. This is because it is precisely that which gives origin to its
                                            Self-Organization as a Whole;
                                                                 [→
                                                                      {}
                                              ii) The symbol “ = 0 ” represents a more general version of the simple figure
                                            “zero”, as the latter systematically appears in the traditional differential equations.
                                            In fact it now represents, at the same time:
                                              - the specific “origin and habitat” conditions associated to the considered Or-
                                            dinal Differential Equation (11);
                                                                         [→
                                               - while the symbol “ = ”, as already anticipated, indicates that the System,
                                            during its Generative Evolution, is persistently “adherent” to its “origin and ha-
                                            bitat” conditions.

                                            9.2. The Second Fundamental Equation of the Maximum
                                                 Ordinality Principle
                                            This Equation is formulated as follows
                                                                                 ( 2 2 )                ( 2 2 )        [→
                                                                   ( d d t )             {r}  d d t (         {r} = 0
                                                                                                                      )           {}                    (12)
                                                                                                                        


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                                     2665                                             Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                and it can be considered as representing a global Feed-Back Process of Ordinal
                                Nature, which is internal to the same System. Equation (12), in fact, asserts that
                                the Relational Space of the System {r} , which “emerges” as a solution from the
                                First Equation, interacts in the form of the Relational Product  (defined in
                                                                                     ( 2 2 )
                                [26]) with its proper Generative Capacity ( d dt )           {r} . In such a way as to
                                originate a comprehensive Generative Capacity, which is particular important
                                for the Ordinal Stability of the System, especially when the latter interacts with
                                other surrounding Systems understood as being its proper habitat.
                                  The Maximum Ordinality Principle, formulated in its two fundamental equa-
                                tions, then represents an Over-deduction with respect to MEmPP. In particular,
                                when the MOP is formulated in such a form, it always presents an Explicit Solu-
                                tion, which can also be structured in a more operative form by means of an
                                “Emerging Quality Simulator” (EQS), formally shown in [26], and already adopted
                                in all the various Examples pertaining to non-Living Systems, Living Systems,
                                and “Thinking” Systems (Human Systems) previously recalled.

                                10. The Radically New Perspective Opened by the Maximum
                                    Ordinality Principle
                                On the basis of what already anticipated in the previous paragraphs, we can
                                surely assert that the Maximum Ordinality Principle “opens” (and at the same
                                time offers) a Radically New Perspective to Modern Science. Not only because of
                                the new Mental Categories adopted to describe the surrounding world but, espe-
                                cially, for its new and specific Formal Language: in particular, the “Incipient”
                                Derivative and its correlative Generative Consequences.
                                   In fact, while all the Traditional Scientific Disciplines affirm that “Every Sys-
                                tem is a mechanism” (at a phenomenological level), the New Approach affirms
                                that “Every System is a Self-Organizing System” (always at a phenomenological
                                level). Such two different conclusions are exactly the clear exit of the adoption of
                                two corresponding different Formal Languages (as previously shown in Table
                                1), which also lead to some other associated extremely important consequences.
                                  In fact, as we have already seen, the adoption of TDC on behalf of the Tradi-
                                tional Scientific Approaches leads to:
                                  i) Unsolvable Problems (in explicit formal terms). Such as, for instance, the
                                famous “Three body Problem” [25].
                                  ii) Intractable Problems (even by using the most advanced computers). For
                                example: Protein Folding [32] and Protein-Protein Interaction [33].
                                  iii) Problems characterized by experimental “drifts”, which always represent
                                an indication of possible “side effects”.
                                  iv) In addition, it is worth pointing out that the description in terms of TDC
                                can present some “side effects” even in the case of accurate experimental con-
                                firmations. Such “side effects”, in fact, can result as being “masked” by the same
                                fact that all the experimental confirmations are always based on the adoption of
                                methods, instrumentation and measurements that are conceived (and designed)

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                        2666                    Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                        C. Giannantoni


                                in a perfect conformity with the fundamental presuppositions of TDC [28].
                                  Vice versa, the adoption of IDC in the context of the New Ordinal Approach
                                does not present such problems, whereas, in turn, it presents several advantages.
                                  In fact, the adoption of the Formal Language IDC, finalized to describe the
                                “Emerging Quality” of “Self-Organizing Systems”, leads to the formulation of
                                the MOP, which is precisely that Principle which is able to offer a radically New
                                Perspective to Modern Science, that is: “Every System is a Self-Organizing Sys-
                                tem” (see Table 1).
                                  This is because IDC results as being the most appropriate language able to
                                describe the fundamental characteristics of “Self-Organizing Systems”. In fact:
                                  i) It is able to represent, in appropriate formal terms, the “Emerging Quality”
                                of Self-Organizing Systems as an “Irreducible Excess”.
                                  ii) In this way IDC “guides” to the formulation of a very general Principle, the
                                Maximum Ordinality Principle (MOP), which can be understood as “One Sole
                                Reference” Principle of General Validity [38].
                                  iii) The Maximum Ordinality Principle, in fact, results as being valid in any
                                Field of Analysis (from non-living Systems, to living Systems and human social
                                Systems too).
                                  iv) In addition, it always leads to explicit formal solutions in the Proper Space
                                and Proper Time of the System [39].
                                  v) At any topological scale (e.g. from atoms to galaxies).
                                  vi) Both under steady state and variable conditions.
                                  vii) What’s more, the corresponding Solution to any mathematical model
                                based on the MOP always results as being an “Emerging Solution” [37]. That is,
                                a Solution whose Ordinal Information content is always much higher than the
                                Ordinal content corresponding to the initial formulation of the problem.
                                  viii) And, as a direct consequence, this leads to the fact that any “Emerging
                                Solution” can never be reduced to mere “functional relationships”.
                                  xi) This is also means that the adoption of the MOP does not require any spe-
                                cific reference to the traditional Physical Laws or to the well-known Thermody-
                                namic Principles (precisely because the latter are always “conceived and formu-
                                lated” in terms of “efficient causality”, “necessary logic” and “functional rela-
                                tionships”).
                                  xv) Finally, the adoption of the MOP (and its associated IDC) never leads to “side
                                effects”. This is because, even when an “Emerging Solution” might manifest some
                                related “Emerging Exits” (see [38]), the latter can always be interpreted as being
                                corresponding “Extra Benefits”, initially not recognized as such [26] [27] [37].
                                  xvi) “Emerging Solutions” that, in addition, manifest that each System evolves
                                in its Proper Time and Proper Space. Or better, its Proper Space-Time [39].
                                  It should be then easy to recognize the validity of what initially anticipated,
                                that is: “the Maximum Ordinality Principle and its correlative Formal Language
                                (IDC) open, and at the same time offer, a Radically New Perspective to Modern
                                Science”.


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                        2667                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                  And this not only for the New Mental Categories adopted, but especially, but
                                in particular way, for the new faithfully corresponding Formal Language (i.e. the
                                Incipient Derivative and its correlative IDC) which effectively enables us to speak,
                                and even more to “think”, according to those Mental Categories.

                                11. Two “Com-Possible” Formal Languages, Albeit “Not
                                    Equivalent” between Them
                                The two Formal Languages, TDC and IDC, respectively, when considered with
                                reference to their corresponding “presuppositions”, result as being two different
                                formal descriptive modalities which are always “com-possible” between them. In
                                the sense that they do not exclude each other. They simply co-exist.
                                  This is because, as already anticipated, the Traditional Scientific Approach, which
                                leads to TDC, cannot exclude (in principle) the adoption of a different Formal
                                Language (e.g. IDC), because of the absence in its presuppositions (especially its
                                “necessary” logic) of any form of Perfect Induction.
                                  On the other hand, the same happens in the case of the adoption of IDC, pre-
                                cisely because of the same reason, although the latter is based on presuppositions
                                characterized by a different form of Logic (the “Adherent” Logic).
                                  Consequently, the two formal languages, TDC and IDC, can always be adopted
                                independently from one another. Although this “com-possibility” in principle
                                does not mean that they are “equi-valent” (in particular, from an operative point
                                of view).
                                  Their operative “in-equivalence”, in fact, can easily be shown by comparing
                                the different consequences of their respective adoption, when such consequences
                                are obviously considered in the light of their corresponding “pre-suppositions”,
                                as previously shown at par. 10.
                                  In this respect, in fact, it is worth mentioning some advantages, from an
                                Operative point of view, on behalf of the MOP and its IDC (with respect to the
                                Traditional Scientific Approach). For example, the particular and specific Stra-
                                tegic Decision Process “they suggest” in any Field of Analysis.
                                   In fact, apart from the advantages due to the availability of always Explicit So-
                                lutions to such a Decisional Process, there are also, in addition, the specific ad-
                                vantages of the same General Methodology for Strategic Decisions in itself con-
                                sidered, which “reflects” its Generative Nature of “Quality Benefits” on all the
                                specific Strategic Decisions in any Filed considered.
                                   As an Ostensive Example of such a very particular aspect, we will consider
                                some different case studies, pertaining to three substantially different Fields of
                                Analysis.

                                12. General Methodology for Strategic Decisions in any Field
                                    of Analysis, based on both the Maximum Ordinality
                                    Principle (MOP) and its Formal Language (IDC)
                                In this respect, we will consider some specific case studies, as Ostensive Exam-


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                       2668                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                        C. Giannantoni


                                ples of progressive ascending Generality and corresponding increasing levels of
                                Ordinality.

                                12.1. General Methodology for Strategic Decisions Able to “Extend”
                                      the Validity of EMA to the Case of Transient Conditions
                                We will here synthetically re-propose such a General Methodology, officially
                                presented for the first time at the Emergy Conference held at University of Flor-
                                ida [40] (on last June 29, 2022), already adopted in the past on the occasion of all
                                the other case studies (of different nature) that will be presented later on.
                                  Such a General Methodology, in fact, was explicitly and formally presented at
                                such a Conference, precisely because understood as a specific contribution fina-
                                lized to the main object of the same Conference: Advances in Emergy Analysis
                                (EMA).
                                  On that occasion we then showed how it is possible, on the basis of such Gen-
                                eral Methodology, to “extend” the validity of Emergy Analysis (EMA) to tran-
                                sient conditions. In fact, at present, it is substantially “limited” (we could also say
                                “blocked”) to the sole case of steady state conditions. This is because, the correl-
                                ative Analysis in transient conditions, if dealt with in term of TDC, the latter
                                Formal Language will practically “filter” the “Emerging Quality” described by
                                the Non-Conservative Rules of Emergy Algebra, typical and specific of EMA in
                                steady state conditions, as a consequence of the basic presuppositions of TDC.
                                  So that, in order to overcome such a situation of “impasse”, the General Me-
                                thodology, in this specific case, is based on a joint adoption of EMA and MOP.
                                In this respect, it is worth starting from a short premise.
                                   We have already shown that the MEmPP (which under steady state conditions
                                condition substantially “coincides” with EMA) and the MOP are intimately re-
                                lated to each other, when they are considered in their Historical-Logical Origin
                                (as shown in the first part of the paper). The MOP, in fact, is nothing but the
                                Re-proposition (in terms of Generative “Incipient” Derivatives) of the MEmPP,
                                formulated in terms of Non-Conservative Algebra.
                                   Consequently, it is also possible, in principle, to adopt them jointly. However,
                                not in “functional” terms, but in Ordinal Terms. In fact, in adherence to their
                                subjacent Generative Adherent Logic, they can give origin to a Unique Ordinal
                                Feed-Back Process of Generative Nature. That is, as a Self-Organizing Logical
                                System of Ordinality 2 2 .
                                   In this respect we will now present the Logical General Methodology for Stra-
                                tegic Decisions when adopted in the Energy Field (understood in its widest
                                meaning), and, as an Ostensive example, when, in particular, it is based on both
                                EMA and MOP, in the form of a Feed-Back Logical and Generative Process of
                                Ordinality 2/2. That is, as “Two Brothers” that cooperate between them, also
                                even in the case of their successive phases of reciprocal Inverse Priority.
                                   EMA, in fact, which (as we know) is nothing but the MEmPP in steady state
                                conditions, in this case represents the first step and, at the same time, the last
                                step of the considered Unique Ordinal Feed-Back Process of Generative Nature:

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                        2669                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                                                              EMA   MOP  
                                                             In Formal Terms        ,                                          (13)
                                                                               MOP   EMA  

                                        In order to show how the “Logical” General Methodology “reflects” (itself) in
                                      operative terms, we will start from considering a given System whose corres-
                                      ponding EMA has led to the Emergy Diagram represented in Figure 1.
                                         In this respect, we will now preliminary show how the results of such an
                                      Analysis can be made apt for a successive analysis in terms of the Maximum Or-
                                      dinality Principle.
                                         To this specific finality, the considered Emergy Diagram can preliminarily be
                                      transformed into the corresponding Relational Space of the System, which is a
                                      specific concept pertaining to the MOP, usually represented by the Ordinal Ma-
                                      trix in Figure 2, as clearly shown in [26]. A Matrix which obviously is not a tra-
                                      ditional matrix, because it does not represent “functional relationships” between
                                      its elements, but only the specific Ordinal Relationships between them.
                                         Such elements, in fact are, by themselves, already of Ordinal Nature (as expli-
                                      citly indicated by the symbols of “tilde” and the adoption of “curly brackets”,
                                      which, as usual, indicate that the System is understood as a Whole).
                                         More precisely, the various sub-Systems of the Emergy Diagram, after having
                                      been specifically numbered according to a given sequence, which, however is es-
                                      sentially discretionary, they can be considered (and thus represented) in terms of
                                      couples. This is because, in an Ordinal Context, the minimum form of Relation-
                                      ship is represented by a “Couple”.
                                        On these bases, the MOP furnishes, always in the form of an explicit formal
                                      solution [26], all the Ordinal Relationships between the various couples of the




                                Figure 1. Example of odum’s emergy diagram [5].

                                                                    α12 ( t ) α12 ( t )        α1N ( t ) 
                                                                                                              
                                                                    α 21 ( t ) α 23 ( t )       α 2 N ( t ) 
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
                                                                   α N 1 ( t ) α N 2 ( t )     α NN ( t ) 
                                                                   
                                               Figure 2. Ordinal matrix representing the relational space of the system.


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                               2670                                Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                                                             C. Giannantoni


                                    System, when the latter has actually reached its corresponding Maximum Ordi-
                                    nality.
                                      Under these conditions, in fact, all the various couples that characterize the
                                    Ordinal Space of the System become of Ordinality     2 2 , independently from           { }
                                    their corresponding initial Ordinalities that they had in the basic Emergy Dia-
                                    gram. In addition (and this, as we will see, represents extremely important aspect),
                                    they satisfy the following Ordinal Relationships, which are the Faithfull “Reflex” of
                                    a Diffusive Generativity that manifests inside the Self-Orgnizing System:
                                                             { 2 2}
                                                                           {              }{ 2 2} ∗
                                                                                                        ( {1} )  {α (t )}{ } ⊕ {λ (t )}{ } (14)
                                                                                                                                                2 2
                                       {α              ( t )}
                                                                                                                                2 2
                                             i , j +1                   ⊕ λi , j +1 ( t )
                                                                                   =                     N −1
                                                                                                                         12             12
                                                                                                                   j


                                for j 1, 2, 3,  , N − 1 .
                                =
                                   Such Relationships (widely illustrated in Appendix 1) are properly termed as
                                “Harmony Relationships” because, when the System is at its Maximum Ordinal-
                                ity, they show that all the various couples are related between them in Generative
                                Terms (and not in “functional terms”), on the basis of the reference to a unique
                                                                                            { 2 2}
                                and sole arbitrary couple, usually indicated as {α12 ( t )}         .
                                       The various couples, in fact, are related on the basis of some additional corre-
                                                                    {2 2}
                                                                 {
                                    lation factors λi , j +1 ( t )              }
                                                                            , which are not of “functional nature” (see the sym-
                                         ∗
                                    bol = ). At the same, the various couples are also related in terms of the Ordinal
                                    Roots of Unity                      ( {1} ) (illustrated in Appendix 2), where the Unity {1}
                                                                         N −1
                                                                                     j

                                    does not indicate a simple “figure”, but it specifically indicates the “Unity” of the
                                    System understood as a Whole.
                                      As an immediately clear Ostensive Example of such an Ordinal Description, it
                                    is sufficient to recall that it is exactly what happens in the case of the Solar Sys-
                                    tem (previously illustrated), when as reference couple is assumed, for example,
                                    Sun and Mercury. Nonetheless, the Ordinal Description of the Solar System is
                                    always the same even if we assume whatever else couple as reference (for in-
                                    stance Earth and Mars).
                                      The Methodology here proposed clearly offers some Significant Advantages,
                                    both in steady state and in transient conditions, especially for the properties of
                                    the above-mentioned Harmony Relationships.
                                      In fact such General Methodology clearly offers an increased rapidity of the
                                    Strategic Decision Process, because the researched Optimal values for the opera-
                                    tive Ordinal Re-Configuration of the System are co-instantaneously given by the
                                    Simulator EQS, even in the case of hundreds of sub-Systems.
                                      At the same time, the same General Methodology offers a correlative higher
                                    reliability of the Re-Qualification Process of System analyzed, because the Deci-
                                    sion Maker correlatively knows all the “optimal values” that are properly apt a
                                    requalifying the Whole System in adherence to its Maximum Ordinality, this is
                                    because they are precisely those furnished by the Harmony Relationships of the
                                    System.

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                                              2671                                 Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                  The same General Methodology, In addition, offers very decisive Ordinal and
                                operative Advantages with reference to those particular transient conditions that,
                                for the sake of brevity, can synthetically be termed as Perspective A and Perspec-
                                tive B.
                                  The latter, in fact, refers to the case in which the Habitat represents a “Distur-
                                bance” to the System.
                                  For example, sudden variations of external market conditions, scarcity of Ener-
                                gy Resources, sometimes due to external political changes (for example the present
                                war Russia-Ukraine), which “modify” the external conditions of the System, as
                                initially assumed, described and represented in the specific and characteristic
                                terms of EMA.
                                   In such a case, the Methodology shows how it is possible to increase (accord-
                                ing to a predetermined desired measure) the Resistance and, at the same time,
                                the Resilience of the System against the considered Adversities.
                                   Vice versa, when the Methodology is adopted in Perspective A, it suggests
                                how to research for the Maximum Ordinality of the Relationship between the
                                System and its pertaining Habitat, because Perspective A specifically refers to the
                                case of a collaborating Inter-Action Process between them.
                                   Such two latter particular transient conditions will be analyzed, in more detail,
                                in the two successive paragraphs.

                                12.2. Requalification Process of an Urban System, From a Seismic
                                     Point of View, Against Calamities
                                This second Ostensive example clearly refers to a completely different filed of
                                analysis, which however, precisely because of its specific difference, can contri-
                                bute to show the General Applicability of the Methodology, which is, by itself,
                                deeply rooted on the Generality of MOP and its correlative Formal Language
                                IDC.
                                   Such an Example, which is carefully illustrated in all its details in [41], refers
                                to a Requalification Process of an Urban System, from a Seismic point of view,
                                against Calamities.
                                   An Example that equally shows (in its specific context) the corresponding in-
                                crease of Resistance and Resilience of the Urban System analyzed.
                                   The description of the village is based on the so called “Minimum Urban
                                Structure” which, as analyzed by V. Fabietti and Others [42], is composed by 39
                                elements (buildings, roads, utilities) that, according to the available data [ib.],
                                can be characterized by means of three Fundamental Indicators: Vulnerability,
                                Index of Urban Complex, Strategic Valence. Consequently, it is describable by
                                means of 29 × 3 Indicators. More precisely:
                                • The “Vulnerability” is the probability that a threat event can induce a more
                                   or less marked loss of integrity.
                                • The “Index of Urban Complex” (or, more simply, “Index of Complex”)
                                   represents the level of physical and functional interconnections with neigh-
                                   boring elements.

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                       2672                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                          C. Giannantoni


                                • The “Strategic Valence”, according to a conventional scale from 1 to 12, in-
                                   dicates the relevance of the role assigned to each specific element, for exam-
                                   ple: administrative center, hospital, commercial center and so on. It is worth
                                   adding that, for practical reasons, in our analysis we have also adopted the
                                   inverse concept of “Vulnerability”, defined as “Persistence to Integrity” (or,
                                   more synthetically, “Persistence”).
                                  The results of the analysis, synthetically shown in Table 5, refer to the Final
                                Configuration of the System as a consequence of the hypothesized earthquake. It
                                is then possible to recognize that such an Ordinal Exit represents a clear manife-
                                station of the recovery of the Internal Stability on behalf of the System, as expli-
                                citly foreseen by Equation (12), that is the Second Fundamental Equation of the
                                MOP.
                                  In fact, on the basis of the results of the analysis, although here represented in
                                an extremely synthetic form with respect to that widely shown in [41], it is
                                possible to immediately recognize the reduction and mitigation of the effects of
                                the earthquake, with reference to the values of the three fundamental Indicators.
                                Both with respect to their maximum values and their minimum values respec-
                                tively.
                                  For the sake of brevity, but also for clarity, the corresponding “mitigations” of
                                the effects are reproduced in Table 5 in the form of percentage changes.
                                  The values in Table 5 clearly shows how, on the basis of the same General
                                Methodology, it is possible to requalify the structures of an Urban System, in
                                order to increase its resistance and its correlative resilience against natural ca-
                                lamities (earthquakes, hurricanes, etc.), by always adopting as reference funda-
                                mental criterion the Maximum Ordinality Principle (MOP) and its correlative
                                IDC.
                                  In fact, in the specific study case adopted as an Ostensive Example, we have a
                                reduction of the earthquake foreseen effects of a little more than 50%.
                                  In this sense we can surely assert that the MOP, especially for its Formal Lan-
                                guage, opens a radically New Perspective also in this field.
                                  In fact the village assumed as a case study was modelled as a Self-Organizing
                                System. This is because, although the village is usually considered as being solely

                                Table 5. Reduction and mitigation of the effects of the earthquake.

                                                                      Initial Value              Final value with
                                   Indicator of Reference
                                                                 without Requalification      Ordinal Requalification

                                  High Values of Persistence              −4.82%                      −2.30%
                                   High Values of Complex                −11.54%                      −5.82%
                                    High Values of Valence                −5.49%                      −2.68%

                                  Low Values of Persistence               −9.92%                      −4.95%
                                   Low Values of Complex                  −6.53%                      −3.19%
                                    Low Values of Valence                 −5.50%                      −2.68%



DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                         2673                    Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                made of buildings, streets, places and so on, in reality it has been conceived,
                                planned and realized by human beings during several centuries. In addition, the
                                people who actually leave in such an urban center, systematically deal with its
                                maintenance, in order to possibly increase its functionality. This justifies the as-
                                sumption of the village as being a Self-Organizing System and, consequently, it has
                                been analyzed in the light of the MOP, which, as we already know, represents a va-
                                lid and General Reference Principle for analyzing both “non-living”, “living” and
                                “conscious” Self-Organizing systems.
                                   All such results were obtained, as usual, by adopting the same Emerging Qual-
                                ity Simulator (EQS), described in [26], which, as already anticipated, represents
                                the operative version of the MOP in terms of IDC.
                                  As far as the specific Methodology pertaining to the Perspective A is con-
                                cerned, that is the case of a positive cooperation between the System and its sur-
                                rounding Habitat, it is also illustrated, from a general point of view, in the same
                                Reference previously mentioned [ib.]. In which it is also shown how the General
                                Methodology can even be adopted at successive increasing Levels of Generality
                                and associated Higher Levels of Ordinality.
                                   However, in order to illustrate such increasing Level of Ordinality, always
                                based on the adoption of the MOP (and especially of its Formal Language IDC),
                                it is surely much more meaningful to show such an increasing Role of the Gen-
                                eral Methodology for Strategic Decisions, with reference to the Concept of “Em-
                                powering Communities”, which will be presented at the next paragraph.

                                12.3. Empowering Communities in the Light of the Maximum Or-
                                dinality Principle, Well Beyond Energy Scarcity
                                This section, in fact, is a synthesis of the paper presented at the European Round
                                Table on Sustainable Consumption and Production Graz (September 8-10, 2021)
                                [43]. It was specifically finalized to show how Empowering Communities may
                                progressively increase their role by adopting the Maximum Ordinality Principle
                                (MOP) and its correlative Formal Language (IDC) as basic reference criterion to
                                this specifically finality.
                                   Such an adoption on behalf of a given Community, in fact, generates an in-
                                creasing sense of being a real Community, at successive and progressively higher
                                levels, together with the corresponding responsibilities of Role.
                                   This aspect will be here synthetically re-proposed by considering the following
                                different Levels of Analysis:
                                   a) As an introductory and preliminarily stage of the Ascending Process pre-
                                viously mentioned, we will consider the case of external adverse conditions, such
                                as, for instance, the case of “energy scarcity”.
                                   However, the Process previously mentioned becomes much more intensive
                                when the MOP and its IDC are adopted to deal with aspects that go well beyond
                                “energy scarcity”. For example, the following cases:
                                   b) Energy Saving and Renewable Energy Sources. The role of Smart Grids.
                                  c) Economics Stability of a System of Nations and their increasing conscious-

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                       2674                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                          C. Giannantoni


                                ness as being a real Community.
                                  d) Increase of Ordinality and Consciousness of a “Community” with reference
                                to both its Internal and External Relationships.
                                  e) Relationships between Man and Environment. Climate change forecasts. For
                                example, the Sea Level Rise over the Period 1900-2000.
                                  However, taking into account the “practical” impossibility of presenting all
                                the various Ascending cases, we will limit to present that could be termed as the
                                basic level. This in order to show how the General Methodology can be adopted
                                in those selected case studies well beyond energy scarcity and, in the end, it will
                                also enable us to recall the General Conclusions of the their corresponding Ana-
                                lyses.
                                  In all the considered study cases, the System assumed as “Reference System” is
                                always the same, made up of five European Countries (more precisely, Italy,
                                France, Spain, Germany, Austria), which were modelled as a unique and sole
                                Self-Organizing System, that is, understood as being a Real Community.
                                  On the basis of such an assumption, as a preliminary stage the above men-
                                tioned “ascending” General Methodology, we will consider the case study cha-
                                racterized by a given amount of energy scarcity, in order to show the increase
                                of Resistance and Resilience of such an Ordinal Community adverse such a
                                hypothesized even.

                                12.3.1. General Methodology in the Case Study Pertaining to a Given
                                        Adverse Energy Scarcity
                                In this perspective, each Nation is characterized by three indicators, shown in
                                Table 6, whose values were taken from World Data Bank (2020).
                                  As far as the energy crisis is concerned, this is thought of as an energy scarcity,
                                which may be due either to a reduction of fossil fuels production or to an in-
                                crease of their prices (or both) and, as a work hypothesis, it was supposed cha-
                                racterized by an “incidence” of the order of 20% on the values of Indicator 1.
                                  The incidence on the values of the other two Indicators is strictly correlative
                                to the Ordinal Reconfiguration of the System (shown in Table 6).
                                  Consequently, the corresponding effects on the System, simulated by means of

                                Table 6. Ordinal Requalification of the System in operative terms (elaboration of data
                                from World Bank).

                                                                             2. Imported equiv.
                                                             1. Imported                          3. GDP per person/
                                 Progressive                                   oil per person/
                                               Nation       equiv. oil per                        1000/Occupational
                                  Number                                        Occupational
                                                            person (ton)                               level (%)
                                                                                   level (%)

                                         1      France           1.8                2.53                  0.570
                                         2       Italy        2.0 * (−)          3.21 * (−)            0.533 * (+)
                                         3     Germany        2.4 * (−)          3.03 * (−)            0.586 * (+)
                                         4      Spain         2.5 * (−)          3.81 * (−)           0.452 * (++)
                                         5     Austria           2.5                3.35                  0.734



DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                        2675                     Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                EQS, in this case show an incidence of the order of 10% on the values of Indica-
                                tor 2 and an incidence of the order of 5% on the values of Indicator 3.
                                  More precisely, Table 7 sows that while the resulting “incidence” on the val-
                                ues of Indicator 1 is equal to 20%, as precisely supposed by hypothesis, the cor-
                                relative “incidence” on the values of Indicator 2 is equal to 9.75%, while the “in-
                                cidence” on the values of Indicator 3 evenly ranges from 5.10% and to 5.16%.
                                  It is then easy to recognize the corresponding reduction and mitigation of the
                                effects due to the reduction of imported energy, with reference to all the values of
                                the three Indicators, both with respect to their maximum and minimum values.
                                  For the sake of synthesis, but also for clarity, the corresponding “mitigations”
                                of the effects are given in Table 7 in the form of percentage changes.
                                   Such results unable us to surely affirm that the System manifests a higher Re-
                                sistance with respect to the corresponding conditions of a total absence of an
                                Ordinal Requalification.
                                  At the same time, it is also possible to recognize a correlative increase of its
                                Resilience.
                                  In fact, in the presence of a prior Ordinal Requalification, the System, after
                                having mitigated the effects of the energy scarcity, still keeps an Ordinality level
                                sufficiently high to adequately, and progressively, reacquire its specific Role,
                                both in terms of Ordinal Relationships within itself and, even more, with respect
                                to its Ordinal Relationships with its surrounding Habitat.
                                  The general conclusions of this (for the moment) preliminarily step of analy-
                                sis can be synthesized as follows:
                                • In view of a possible energy scarcity (or, more in general, energy crises), any
                                   System of Nations should provide, in advance, to improve its Ordinal Requa-
                                   lification, appropriately commensurate to the “foreseeable” energy crises
                                   pertaining to its specific case.
                                • This is because, from such an Ordinal Requalification, it will result a “Re-
                                   bound” of its “Resistance” and at the same time, of its correlative level of
                                   “Resilience”.
                                  This evidently becomes even truer, for example, in the case of the European
                                Community (made up of 27 Nations) and, even more, in the case of USA (made

                                Table 7. “Mitigations” of the effects in the form of percentage changes.

                                                                      Initial Value               Final value with
                                   Indicator of Reference
                                                                 without Requalification       Ordinal Requalification

                                  High Values of Indicator 1              −20.0%                           −10.0%
                                  High Values of Indicator 2              −9.75%                           −4.67%
                                  High Values of Indicator 3              −5.16%                           −2.18%

                                  Low Values of Indicator 1               −20.0%                       −10.10%
                                  Low Values of Indicator 2               −9.74%                           −4.67%
                                  Low Values of Indicator 3               −5.10%                           −2.67%



DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                         2676                    Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                        C. Giannantoni


                                up of 50 States), with particular reference to their relevant specific Role in the
                                World.
                                  In these cases, in fact, there is a progressive increase of the corresponding Or-
                                dinality of the Systems, because it is directly associated to the increasing number
                                of their States, as clearly shown by Eq. (1.1), which is formulated, of course, in
                                Ordinal Terms.
                                  As far as a synthetic exposition of the results obtained in correspondence of
                                the successive higher levels of analysis, we can briefly recall that.

                                12.3.2. Energy Saving and Renewable Energy Sources. The Role of Smart
                                        Grids
                                The diffusion of the Smart Grids should be uniform between the various Nations
                                and, contextually, among their pertinent Regions, always for the respect of the
                                above mentioned Harmony Relationships and the correlative reduction of the
                                “vulnerability” to energy scarcity.

                                12.3.3. Economics Stability of a System of Nations and Their Increasing
                                        Consciousness as Being a Real Community
                                The results pertaining to this aspect clearly shows that a free market economy
                                cannot be considered as being a simple “mechanism”, as it is usually supposed as
                                being on behalf all the Traditional Theories of Economics.
                                  A “free market”, in fact, is characterized by “Initiative”, “Inventiveness” (un-
                                derstood as a “continuous development of new products”), without considering
                                that any transaction always generates “Extra” Benefits of Ordinal Nature [44],
                                which are irreducible to a traditional description in terms of causality, necessity,
                                functionality.
                                  All these conditions then suggest that a “free market” between Nations can be
                                more appropriately modelled as a “Self-Organizing System”. In fact, when “The
                                three-good two factor Problem” is interpreted in the light of the MOP and its
                                ITC [36], the Problem can be solved for an arbitrary number of goods (Ng), in
                                the presence of Three Productive Factors: Capital (K), Labour (L) and Natural
                                Resources (N) [29].

                                12.3.4. Increase of Ordinality and Consciousness of a “Community” both
                                        in Its Internal and External Relationships
                                The analysis of this aspect, performed in the light of MOP and its correlative
                                Formal Language (IDC), shows that:
                                • when a System of Nations (for example the European Community) has reached
                                   its Maximum Level of Ordinality;
                                • characterized by its corresponding internal Stability;
                                • and, consequently, a much deeper “Consciousness” of being an effective Com-
                                   munity;
                                • all these aspects can have a direct reflex on the improvement of its Ordinal
                                   Relationships. Both internal to the single Nations and between them.
                                  In addition, a further improved level of Relationships can manifest when such

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                        2677                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                Communities will establish New Ordinal Relationships with other countries.
                                  The abovementioned aspects also suggest that, in addition, any considered
                                Ordinal System of Nations could also play a more decisive role in the respect of
                                the Environment, by assuming Strategic Decisions always in the light of the
                                MOP and its IDC.

                                12.3.5. Relationships between Man and Environment. For Example:
                                        Climate Change Forecasts and the Sea Level Rise over the Period
                                        1900-2000
                                In this case the “Empowering Communities” may manifest their increase of
                                consciousness and their particular role with reference to the Environment, only
                                in the respect, however, of the following conditions:
                                • The “prior condition” is that they have reached a sufficiently high level of
                                   Ordinality as Self-Organizing Systems, by adopting as a “Reference Guide”
                                   the Maximum Ordinality Principle and its correlative Formal Language (IDC).
                                • Afterwards, they know very well the Environmental Phenomenology pertain-
                                   ing to the aspects of specific interest.
                                • This means that they are able to recognize the “Emerging Quality” of the
                                   Processes they are going to deal with.
                                • And, as a fundamental aspect, they are systematically oriented at the research
                                   for a possible Syntony with such an “Emerging Quality”.
                                • Finally, under these achieved conditions, even in the case of potential adverse
                                   events, they can mitigate the associated undesired “effects”, always in adhe-
                                   rence to the MOP and its Formal Language (IDC).
                                  In order to illustrate the importance of the previous conditions, we can recall,
                                as an Ostensive example, the Sea Level Rise over the Period 1900-2000, as de-
                                scribed in [29].
                                  It is evident that such a process is difficult to contrast if its specific “origin” is
                                not deeply known.
                                  At a first glance, in fact, the process “seems to be inexplicable”, because the
                                correlative “causes” are still unknown [45].
                                  However, this is simply due to the fact that the specific “causes” are systemat-
                                ically researched for in terms of efficient causality, logical necessity, functional
                                relationships, that is they are researched for as the various processes involved
                                were pure “mechanisms” (as illustrated at par. 2.1).
                                  In reality the Process of Sea Level Rise can be analyzed in the light of the MOP
                                by means of its associated Ordinal Simulator EQS (ib.), which operatively trans-
                                lates and faithfully represents the various Harmony Relationships between all
                                the different Physical Systems involved in the process (sea, ice, hearth, sun, etc.).
                                  Such Inter-Actions in fact, because of their Ordinal Nature, are precisely those
                                that represent the real “generative cause” of that registered “unexpected” trend.
                                Which, according to such an interpretation, is nothing but an “Emerging Exit”
                                of a Unique “Self-Organizing System”.
                                  Consequently, “Empowering Communities” should correspondently modify


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                        2678                     Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                       C. Giannantoni


                                their way of “Thinking, Decision Making, and Acting” so as to research for
                                the maximum Syntony with the “Emerging Quality” shown by the considered
                                Processes, so as to minimize both present and future effects with respect to the
                                Environment.
                                  With specific reference to this latter respect, we will now consider a particular
                                “in-equivalence” between the Formal Languages TDC and IDC.

                                12.3.6. A Particular “In-Equivalence” between the Formal Languages
                                        TDC and IDC, in the Case of Strategic Decisions with Reference to
                                        the Relationships between Man and the Environment
                                As anticipated in the title, the “in-equivalence” between the Formal languages
                                TDC and IDC becomes particularly evident when the General Methodology for
                                Strategic Decisions involves the Relationships between Man and the Environ-
                                ment and, more specifically, when the latter are focused in the Light of the
                                well-known categories of “Thinking, Decision Making, and Acting”.
                                  In fact when the Methodology based on the Formal Language IDC, is com-
                                pared, in this specific context, with other more traditional Strategic Decision
                                Processes (such as, for instance, those that deal with Environmental Accounting
                                and Management in prevailingly (or essentially) “cardinal terms”), the Ordinal
                                Methodology reveals its Maximum Significant Contribution to the Radically New
                                Perspective offered to Modern Science.
                                  In fact, with specific reference to the Verbal Enunciation of the MOP, in which
                                the term “System” now plays the Role of “Man” (or “Human System”) and the
                                term “Habitat” now plays the Role of the “Environment”, it is possible to recog-
                                nize that:
                                  At the level of “Thinking”:
                                  Traditional Methodologies for Strategic Decisions, in spite of some specific
                                conceptual progresses during the last decades, always intrinsically “reflect” the
                                general idea that “every system is a mechanism”. Consequently, at the level of
                                “Thinking”, the Environment is nothing but a Set of “Mechanisms”, and conse-
                                quently it is always considered as an “object”, that can be “used” as such, in
                                “functional terms”, mainly to economic finalities.
                                   The New Ordinal Perspective, on the contrary, is always orientated at de-
                                scribing the Environment as One sole and Unique “Self-Organizing System”,
                                even when considered in the specific contest of Economics. Consequently, and as
                                it usually happens, The Ordinal Perspective always tends to Maximize both the
                                Ordinality of the “Economic” System and that of its correlative Environment.
                                   Such a specific difference, at the level of “Thinking”, evidently leads to a cor-
                                relative “in-equivalence” at the level of “Decision Making and Acting”.
                                  At the level of “Decision Making”:
                                  In the case of The Traditional Methodologies, the powerful expressive capaci-
                                ty of the formal language adopted (namely TDC), systematically “forces” the De-
                                cision toward the research for specific “functional” solutions and their subse-
                                quent practical implementation.


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                       2679                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                  Whereas in the case of The Ordinal Perspective, the specific capacity of its
                                corresponding and completely different formal language adopted (namely IDC),
                                is that which systematically “guides” toward the research for specific practical
                                solutions. Which are now, and in all cases, of “Ordinal Nature”, as well as their
                                subsequent and “adherent” actual implementation. In this case with particular
                                reference to the Environment, which always manifests, also in the Economic
                                Field, its correlative, specific and proper “Emerging Quality”.
                                  At the level of Action:
                                  It is exactly where the profound differences become particularly evident.
                                  This is precisely because, in the case of The Traditional Perspectives, the cor-
                                responding formal solutions, which are of “functional nature”, become corres-
                                ponding “necessary” consequential facts.
                                  Vice versa, the New Ordinal Approach, precisely because of its specific Or-
                                dinal Formal Language (IDC), always researches for the actual Maximum Ordi-
                                nality (that is the Maximum Synthony) between the “System” (Man) and its sur-
                                rounding “Habitat” (Environment).
                                  In such a case, in fact, the corresponding formal solutions, which are always of
                                “Ordinal Nature”, become perfectly and faithfully adherent consequential facts,
                                that manifest the achieved researched Syntony.

                                13. Conclusions
                                We have already shown the Fundamental Role of the “Formal Languages” TDC
                                and IDC, respectively, and, at the same time, their com-possibility of adoption,
                                at a Logical level.
                                  This is because, in the absence of any form of Perfect Induction, by nature in
                                both the two different typologies of “subjacent” Logic respectively adopted, they
                                result as being always “com-possible”, in the sense that they do not exclude each
                                other. Precisely because (as already said) none of the two has the property of the
                                Perfect Induction.
                                  Consequently, they cannot exclude each other, in an absolute sense, simply
                                because they cannot do it, in any case whatsoever. They simply co-exist.
                                  At the same time, however, we have also seen their “in-equivalence” from an
                                operative point of view.
                                  This means that, precisely because of their “com-possibility” at a Logical
                                Level, the “operative” conclusion would be that it is always possible to adopt
                                the one or the other or, even better, both together. That is, at the same time
                                (although in parallel), in order to possibly choose, in such a way, the optimal
                                operative solutions, according to the validity (and confirmation) of their re-
                                spective conclusions, when the latter are assured by their corresponding expe-
                                rimental results.
                                  In such a case, however, it is fundamental to remember that, always in con-
                                formity to the Absence of Perfect Induction, which is precisely that particular
                                logical condition which, in any case, allows such a third possible option:

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                         2680                 Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                       C. Giannantoni


                                • TDC is the Formal Language that faithfully “reflects” the presuppositions of
                                   the Traditional Scientific Approach, which is “self-referential”
                                • While IDC is the Formal Language that faithfully “reflects” the presupposi-
                                   tions of the New Scientific Approach, which is “hetero-referential”.
                                  The Fundamental Reference of the latter in fact is the “Emerging Quality” of
                                Self-Organizing Systems. With respect to which, the New Ordinal Approach
                                firstly modifies its mental categories, then adopts a faithfully corresponding For-
                                mal Language, which allows to formulate a General Reference Principle, the
                                Maximum Ordinality Principle, in the light of which it always seeks for the Best
                                Synthony with the “Emerging Quality” that manifests itself in the surrounding
                                world.
                                  A Synthony is revealed (albeit always not less than, as shown in [26]) by the
                                Maximum Level of Ordinality each time possibly attainable. Obviously, because
                                always in the respectful and faithful adherence to the initial conditions of the
                                System as well as those of its surrounding Habitat.
                                  Nonetheless, in reality there exists another possible Option, of Higher Ordi-
                                nality with respect to the three options previously presented. An Option that, in
                                Generative Logic, represents an Over-Conclusion.
                                   Over-Conclusion
                                   Such an Option of Higher Ordinality, in fact, is actually possible, because the
                                General Methodology for Strategic Decisions previously shown has a very gener-
                                al validity. Consequently, it can be also adopted in an even more general case
                                (with respect the ones previously considered): that is, it can also be adopted with
                                Reference to the Field of “Formal Languages”.
                                   Consequently, there exists (at least) another possible Option, of Higher Ordi-
                                nality with respect to the three options previously presented.
                                   In fact, as already shown in the first Ostensive Example (par. 12.1) pertaining
                                to EMA and MOP, it is always possible to adopt the Two Formal Languages
                                jointly. However, not in “parallel” or in reciprocal “functional” terms, but in Or-
                                dinal Terms. In fact, in the respectful adherence to their specific subjacent Logics,
                                the two Formal Languages TDC and IDC can give origin to a Unique Ordinal Feed-
                                Back Process of Generative Logical Nature. That is, a Logical Self-Organizing Sys-
                                tem of Ordinality { 2 2} .
                                   In other terms, the General Methodology for Strategic Decisions, when adopted
                                in the Formal Field of Mathematical Logic, clearly shows that TDC and IDC are
                                similar to “Two Brothers”, which cooperate between them, also in the case of the
                                successive phases of their reciprocal Inverse Priority.
                                   In such a case, in fact, TDC will represent the first step and, at the same time,
                                the last step of the considered Unique Ordinal Feed-Back Process of Generative
                                Nature. In Formal Terms:
                                                                 TDC   IDC  
                                                                       ,                                  (15)
                                                                  IDC   TDC  

                                  This consequently leads to the following Over-Conclusion:


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                       2681                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                     The Maximum Ordinality Principle (MOP) and its Formal Language, namely
                                 The “Incipient” Differential Calculus (IDC), are really open, and at the same
                                 time offer, a Very Radically New Perspective to Modern Science because, when
                                 the General Methodology for Strategic Decisions, deeply “rooted” in them, is
                                 adopted at such a General Logical-Formal Level, it surprisingly “reveals”, and at
                                 the same time “reflects”, at an operative level, that:
                                   TDC and IDC, precisely because considered in the context of such a General
                                 Logical Structure, are “nothing but” a unique “Casket” of “Precious Pearls”3.

                                 Conflicts of Interest
                                 The author declares no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this pa-
                                 per.

                                 References
                                 [1]    Boltzmann, L. (1905) Der zweite Haupsatz der mechanishen warme Theorie. Al-
                                        manach der K. Acad. Wiss Mechanishe, Wien, 36, 225-299.
                                 [2]    Lotka, A.J. (1922) Contribution to the Energetics of Evolution. Proceedings of the
                                        National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 8, 147-150.
                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.8.6.147
                                 [3]    Lotka, A.J. (1922) Natural Selection as a Physical Principle. Proceedings of the Na-
                                        tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 8, 151-154.
                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.8.6.151
                                 [4]    Lotka, A.J. (1945) The Law of Evolution as a Maximal Principle. Human Biology,
                                        17, 167-194.
                                 [5]    Odum, H.T. (1994) Ecological and General Systems. An Introduction to Systems
                                        Ecology. Reviesd Edition, University Press of Colorado, Boulder.
                                 [6]    Odum, H.T. (1994) Environmental Accounting. Environ. Engineering Sciences. Uni-
                                        versity of Florida, Gainesville.
                                 [7]    Odum, H.T. (1994) Self-Organization and Maximum Power. Environ. Engineering
                                        Sciences. University of Florida, Gainesville.
                                 [8]    Brown, M.T. and Herendeen, R.A. (1996) Embodied Energy Analysis and EMERGY
                                        Analysis: A Comparative View. Ecological Economics, 19, 219-235.
                                        https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8009(96)00046-8
                                 [9]    Odum, H.T. (1988) Self-Organization, Transformity and Information. Science, 242,
                                        1132-1139. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.242.4882.1132
                                [10]    Odum, H.T. (1995) Energy Systems and the Unification of Science. From Maximum
                                        Power. The Ideas and Applications of H.T. Odum. Hall, C.A.S., Ed., University
                                        Press of Colorado, Boulder.
                                [11]    Giannantoni, C. (1998) Environment, Energy, Economy, Politics and Rights. Pro-
                                        ceedings of Advances in Energy Studies, Porto Venere, 27-31 May 1998, 541-558.
                                [12]    Giannantoni, C. (2001) Mathematical Formulation of the Maximum Em-Power Prin-
                                        ciple. 2nd Biennial International Emergy Conference, Gainesville, 20-22 September
                                        2001, 15-33.
                                [13]    Giannantoni, C. (2002) The Maximum Em-Power Principle as the basis for Ther-

                                 Or more simply, but analogously, a Duet Musical Chord of Ordinal Nature, as illustrated in the
                                 3

                                 Third Part of [46].


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                           2682                    Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                           C. Giannantoni


                                       modynamics of Quality. Ed. SGE, Padua.
                                [14]   Giannantoni, C. (2006) Mathematics for Generative Processes: Living and Non-Living
                                       Systems. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 189, 324-340.
                                       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cam.2005.03.032
                                [15]   Giannantoni, C. (2004) Differential Bases of Emergy Algebra. 3rd Emergy Evalua-
                                       tion and Research Conference, Gainesville, 29-31 January 2004, 45-62.
                                [16]   Giannantoni, C. (2006) Emergy Analysis as the First Ordinal Theory of Complex
                                       Systems. Proceedings of the 4th Emergy Conference 2006, Gainesville, 17-22 Janu-
                                       ary 2006, 15.1-15.14.
                                [17]   Giannantoni, C. (2008) From Transformity to Ordinality, or Better: From Genera-
                                       tive Transformity to Ordinal Generativity. Proceedings of the 5th Emergy Confe-
                                       rence, Gainesville, 31 January-2 February 2008, 581-598.
                                [18]   Giannantoni, C. (2007) Armonia delle Scienze (vol. I). La Leggerezza della Qualità.
                                       Ed. Sigraf, Pescara.
                                [19]   Giannantoni, C. (2008) Armonia delle Scienze (vol. II). L’Ascendenza della Qualità.
                                       Ed. Sigraf, Pescara.
                                [20]   Giannantoni, C. (2001) Advanced Mathematical Tools for Energy Analysis of Com-
                                       plex Systems. Proceedings of the International Workshop on “Advances in Energy
                                       Studies”, Porto Venere, 23-27 May 2000, 563-572.
                                [21]   Giannantoni, C. (2003) The Problem of the Initial Conditions and Their Physical
                                       Meaning in Linear Differential Equations of Fractional Order. Applied Mathematics
                                       and Computation, 141, 87-102. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0096-3003(02)00323-5
                                [22]   Giannantoni, C. (2001) Mathematics for Quality. Living and Non-Living Systems.
                                       2nd Paper Presented at the 2nd Biennial International Emergy Conference, 20-22
                                       September 2001, 185-201.
                                [23]   Giannantoni, C. (2010) The Maximum Ordinality Principle. A Harmonious Dis-
                                       sonance. Proceedings of the 6th Emergy Conference, Gainesville, 14-16 January 2010,
                                       55-72.
                                [24]   Oldham, K.B. and Spanier, J. (1974) The Fractional Calculus. Mathematics in Science
                                       and Engineering Vol. 111, Academic Press, Inc., South California, 92-101.
                                [25]   Poincaré, H. (1952) Science and Hypothesis. Dover, New York.
                                [26]   Giannantoni, C. (2022) The MOP, from the “Incipient” Derivative to EQS Simula-
                                       tor. http://www.ordinality.org
                                [27]   Giannantoni, C. (2017) L’Eccedenza della Qualità e il, P.d.M.O.
                                       http://www.ordinality.it
                                [28]   Giannantoni, C. (2016) The “Emerging Quality” of Self-Organizing Systems, When
                                       Modeled According to the Maximum Ordinality Principle, Offers a Radically New
                                       Perspective to Modern Science. Proceedings of the 9th Biennial Emergy Research
                                       Conference, Gainesville, 6-7 January 2016, 281-298.
                                [29]   Giannantoni, C. (2019) Energy, Economy, Environment, Well-Being. The Role of
                                       Formal Languages for Finding and Implementing Solutions. Journal of Environ-
                                       mental Accounting and Management, 7, 139-153.
                                [30]   Giannantoni, C. (2020) The Evolution of the Universe as a Self-Organizing System
                                       in the Light of the Maximum Ordinality Principle, in the Absence of “Dark Energy”
                                       and “Dark Matter”. Paper Prepared for the 11th Biennial Emergy Research Confe-
                                       rence University of Florida, Gainesville, 23-25 April 2020.
                                       http://www.ordinality.it


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                          2683                    Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                [31]   Giannantoni, C. (2022) The Accelerated Expansion of the Universe, in the Light of
                                       the Maximum Ordinality Principle, in the Absence of “Dark Energy” and “Dark
                                       Matter”. http://www.ordinality.org
                                [32]   Giannantoni, C. (2010) Protein Folding, Molecular Docking, Drug Design. The Role
                                       of the Derivative “Drift” in Complex Systems Dynamics. Proceedings of the 3rd In-
                                       ternational Conference on Bioinformatics, Valencia, 20-24 January 2010, 244-250.
                                [33]   Giannantoni, C. (2015) Protein-Protein Interaction in the Light of the Maximum
                                       Ordinality Principle. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Bioinfor-
                                       matics, Bio-Computational Systems and Biotechnologies (BIOTECHNO 2015), 24-29
                                       May 2015, Rome, 33-37.
                                [34]   Giannantoni, C. (2011) The “Case of Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy”. Proceedings
                                       of the 4th International Conference on Bioinformatics, Rome, 26-29 January 2011,
                                       244-250.
                                [35]   Giannantoni, C. (2018) A Unique Method for Skipping any Exon in Duchenne Mus-
                                       cular Dystrophy. http://www.ordinality.org
                                [36]   Giannantoni, C. (2011) Oeco-Nomics in the Light of the Maximum Ordinality Prin-
                                       ciple. The N-Good Three-Factor Problem. 3rd International Workshop Advances in
                                       Cleaner Production, Sao Paulo, 12-15 May 2011, 1-9.
                                       http://www.advancesincleanerproduction.net
                                [37]   Giannantoni, C. (2012) Oeco-Nomics in the Light of the Maximum Ordinality
                                       Principle. The N-Good Three-Factor Problem. 3rd International Workshop Ad-
                                       vances in Cleaner Production, Sao Paulo, 12-15 May 2011, 1-9.
                                       http://www.advancesincleanerproduction.net
                                [38]   Giannantoni, C. (2014) Toward One Sole Reference Principle Generating “Emerg-
                                       ing Solutions” of Progressively Ascending Ordinality. Proceedings of the 8th Bi-
                                       ennial Emergy Research Conference, University of Florida, Gainesville, 16-18 Janu-
                                       ary 2014, 33-50.
                                [39]   Giannantoni, C. (2018) Self-Organizing Systems, When Modeled According to the
                                       Maximum Ordinality Principle, Always Present Explicit Formal Solutions, in Their
                                       Proper Time and Proper Space. Proceedings of the 10th Biennial Emergy Confe-
                                       rence, University of Florida, Gainesville, 25-27 January 2018, 137-156.
                                [40]   Giannantoni, C. (2022) 5th Emergy Mini-Conference, University of Florida (via
                                       Zoom), 29 June 2022. https://cep.ees.ufl.edu>conferences
                                [41]   Giannantoni, C. and Cennini, L. (2021) Increasing of Resistance and Resilience of
                                       an Urban System against Calamities in the Light of the Maximum Ordinality Prin-
                                       ciple. Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics, 9, 1926-1945.
                                [42]   Samuele Biondi, S., Valter Fabietti, V. and Vanzi, I. (2011) Modelli di valutazione
                                       per la vulnerabilita sismica urbana. Magazine Urbanistica, No. 147, University “G.
                                       d’Annunzio”, Chieti.
                                [43]   Giannantoni, C. (2021) 290 Empowering Communities in the Light of the Maxi-
                                       mum Ordinality Principle. Selected Case Studies Well beyond Energy Scarcity. Pro-
                                       ceedings of the 20th European Round Table on Sustainable Consumption and Pro-
                                       duction, Graz, 8-10 September 2021.
                                [44]   Giannantoni, C. and Zoli, M. (2010) The Four-Sector Diagram of Benefits (FSDOB)
                                       as a Method for Evaluating Strategic Interactions between Humans and the Envi-
                                       ronment. The Case Study of Hydrogen Fuel Cell Buses. Ecological Economics, 69,
                                       486-494.
                                [45]   Meier, F.M. and Wahr, M.J. (2002) Sea Level Is Rising: Do We Know Why? Pro-
                                       ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 99,


DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                          2684                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                           C. Giannantoni


                                       6524-6526.
                                [46]   Giannantoni, C., Rossi, R. (2014) Dal Multiverso all’Uni-Verso Tendenziale. Ed. Si-
                                       graf, Pescara.




DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                          2685                   Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                  Appendix 1. Process of Genesis of the Harmony
                                              Relationships
                                  In this Appendix we want to point out that the Harmony Relationships represent
                                  an “Emerging Solution” with respect to the Solution to the First Fundamental
                                  Equation and, at the same time, a corresponding “Exceeding” Solution.
                                     Let us then recall the basic elements that will enable us to show that the Har-
                                  mony Relationships represent an “Emerging Extra” of Generative Nature, [23]
                                  [26] [27] [28].
                                     The Solution to the First Fundamental Equation, in fact, allow us to write the
                                  following topological “Assignation Relationships”
                                                             {2 2} ∗              {2 2}               {2 2}
                                {α12 ( t )}{ } ⊕ {λ12 ( t )}       = {α1 j ( t )}           {        }
                                           2 2
                                                                                            ⊕ λ1 j ( t )         for j = 3, 4,  , N (A1.1)

                                  which, when re-written in terms of “Incipient” Derivatives, up to the order N −
                                  1, they represent the “Diffusive Generativity” inside the Self-Organising System,
                                  and assume the form
                                                                      k                           k
                                                               
                                                                     ∗             
                                                                                         
                                                    α
                                                    12 ( t ) ⊕ 
                                                                λ12  =  α
                                                                         1j ( t ) ⊕ 
                                                                                     λ1j  =
                                                                                           for k 1, 2,  , N − 1                   (A1.2)
                                                                                      
                                  in which, for simplicity of notation, the Ordinalities                      {2 2} , which appear in
                                  Equation (A1.1), are thought as being included in the symbols of the quantities
                                  to which they refer to, and λ1 j represent N − 1 associated Correlating Factors.
                                     Equation (A1.2) cannot be interpreted as a “necessary consequence” of Equa-
                                  tion (A1.1), because the latter are obtained on the basis of “Incipient” Deriva-
                                  tives. Consequently, they are all of Generative Nature.
                                     In fact, if rewritten in the following form


                                                                                     k
                                                                          
                                                                               
                                                            α12 ( t ) ⊕ λ12 
                                                                              
                                                                                     k
                                                                                          = 1 for
                                                                                             =     k 1, 2,  , N − 1               (A1.3)
                                                                           
                                                                                 
                                                            α1 j ( t ) ⊕ λ1 j 
                                                                                
                                  they allow to assert that the considered System is already characterized by a
                                  proper and specific “Interior Unit”, of Generative Nature, formally represented
                                  by the symbol “ 1 ”.
                                     Such a “Unity”, however, is still in the form of “Not Less Than”. This is be-
                                  cause:
                                  • in a Generative Contest, they are certainly not the parts that, through the
                                      Relationships “between” them, give “Origin” to the “Excess of Unity”;
                                  • because it is exactly true the opposite: in fact, it is the Generative Unit of the
                                      System that, with its proper “Excess”, Qualifies the Relationships “between”
                                      the parts.
                                     Consequently, the most Adherent Formulation of the Self-Organizing Diffu-
                                  sive Generative Process is that which can be obtained by re-proposing Equation

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                               2686                               Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                                                C. Giannantoni


                                (A1.3) in the form
                                                                                               k
                                                                                    
                                                                                         
                                                                      α12 ( t ) ⊕ λ12 
                                                                                                  ∗

                                                                                               k
                                                                                                    = 1{ } for ∀k                     (A1.4)
                                                                                     
                                                                                           
                                                                      α1 j ( t ) ⊕ λ1 j 
                                                                                          
                                or better, even more properly, as follows
                                                                             
                                                                                   
                                                              α12 ( t ) ⊕ λ12  ∗
                                                                                              1
                                                                                            ~ 
                                                                                  
                                                                             
                                                                                   
                                                                                          {}
                                                                                            N − 1
                                                                                     = 1   , j = 2,  , N                         (A1.5)
                                                              α1 j ( t ) ⊕ λ1 j 
                                                                                  
                                in which the symbol                  {1} now formally represents the Generative Whole,
                                which, at the same time, is Self-Organizing and of Ordinal Nature, while its
                                                                  ~ 
                                unique and sole exponent 1  N − 1 explicitly represents the fundamental
                                                                       
                                concept previously anticipated, that is: it is the “Whole”, with its proper Genera-
                                tivity “Excess”, the one that properly “Qualifies” the Relationships “Between” the
                                parts.
                                      This is obviously true not in the sense of Relationships understood “two by
                                two”, but as the specific Reflex of an Ordinal Unit, which, in any case, represents
                                an “Irreducible Excess” with respect to the simple “composition” of the single
                                “parts”.
                                      Consequently, Relation (A1.5), can also be written in the form
                                                                                  1
                                                                                ~
                                                               
                                                                     ∗      N − 1 
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
                                                                         {}
                                                                                        
                                                α1 j ( t ) ⊕
                                                    =          λ1 j  1    α12 ( t ) ⊕ λ12  for j = 2, 3,  , N             (A1.6)
                                                                                                  
                                which, when reinterpreted in terms of “Progenitor Relationships”, finally leads
                                to the formal expression of the Harmony Relationships. The latter, in fact, when
                                written in the form

                                                                 (            )
                                                             ∗
                                {α         ( t ) ⊕ λ1, j +1 ( t )} =   {}  {α12 ( t ) ⊕ λ12 ( t )} for
                                                                     ~

                                  1, j +1
                                                                     N −1 1                            =     j 1, 2,  , N − 1 (A1.7)
                                                                                  j


                                clearly show that the Diffusive Generativity “updates”, by Assignation, the same
                                reference couple “12”.
                                  Equation (A1.7) then show that all the elements of the Ordinal Matrix in Fig-
                                ure 2, can be obtained on the basis of one sole couple α12 ( t ) assumed as ref-
                                erence and N − 1 associated Correlating Factors.
                                      In this respect, it is also worth noting that condition (A1.2) is properly that
                                which represent the fundamental presupposition of what could be termed as an
                                Intensive Whole, precisely because of the “consonance” between all the genera-
                                tive derivatives up to the order N − 1, which are the “Reflex” of the Diffusive
                                Generativity inside the System.
                                      This is the specific reason why, by means of the MOP, and its correlative

DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                               2687                                    Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
C. Giannantoni


                                Harmony Relationships, it was possible to reconsider some “particular” prob-
                                lems that, in the Traditional Scientific Literature, are generally known as being
                                “unsolvable”, “intractable”, “with drift”. Whose solutions ended up by showing
                                that the Maximum Ordinality Principle has an extremely general validity [46].

                                Appendix 2. The Ordinal Roots of Unity                                                             {1}
                                In this respect it is worth observing that Relationships (A1.7) are written in such
                                a form only for reasons of clarity and exposition simplicity. In such a form, in
                                fact, it could seem that the various elements that characterize the System are
                                “still” related, “between” them, according to Relationships of the type “two by
                                two”.
                                   In reality, if one makes explicit the term                                          ( {1} ) according to its more
                                                                                                                        N −1
                                                                                                                            ~


                                                                                                                                        j
                                                                                                                   1                          1
                                                                                                                ~                       ~  
                                specific and proper meaning, that is as                                 {1}     N − 1
                                                                                                                        ≡ 1{}    N −1,  N − 1 
                                                                                                                                                      , in which N − 1

                                                                    ~ 
                                refers to the cardinality, while  N − 1 refers to the Internal Ordinal “(N −1)-
                                                                       
                                ary” Relationship, it is possible to more appropriately write (by also pointing out
                                the Ordinalities 2,      { }
                                                    2 , previously underwritten)

                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                   ~  
                                                                      { }                                                                             { 2 2}
                                    {α ( t )}{ } ⊕ {λ ( t                                                                      {2 2}
                                                                                 ∗
                                                            )} {1}                                                                                {           }
                                                 2 2                   2 2
                                                                                                                    {α12 ( t )}
                                                                                            N −1,  N − 1 
                                        1j         =         1j                                                                    ⊕ λ12 ( t )          (A2.1)

                                that is, even more explicitly, in the form
                                                                                 N −1 1
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                         ( { })
                                                                                            1
                                                                                                
                                                                                                
                                                                                                
                                                 { 2 2}
                                                         {
                                {αi, j +1 ( t )} ⊕ λi, j +1 ( t
                                                          =       )
                                                                    {
                                                                     }
                                                                      2 2 } ∗ 
                                                                                
                                                                                   N −1 1
                                                                                         ( { })
                                                                                               
                                                                                            2   {α
                                                                                                   12 ( t )}
                                                                                                             { 2 2}
                                                                                                                      ⊕ λ12 ( t )
                                                                                                                                   {2 2}
                                                                                                                                           (A2.2)      {           }
                                                                                              
                                                                                               
                                                                                 N −1 
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                       1 ( { }) 
                                                                                                
                                                                                           N −1 


                                from which it is possible to recognize that the single “cardinal” values that in
                                Equation (A1.7) appear as they were “distinct”, and, in addition, as being “sepa-
                                rated”, in reality they are the Reflex of an Ordinal Unit that transcends them,
                                and it relates them in the form of an (N − 1)-ary Relationship.
                                   This is the aspect that (more than others) clearly manifests that the Harmony
                                Relationships represent an “Excess” with respect the initial Assignation Rela-
                                tionships (A1.1) and (A1.2).
                                   As far as the “explicit” meaning of the Ordinal Routs of Unity is concerned,
                                previously synthetically indicated in the form

                                                                  ( {1}=
                                                                    N −1
                                                                        ) for j 1, 2, 3, , N −1
                                                                                     j
                                                                                                                                                                       (A2.3)

                                it is worth expressly pointing out that the symbol                                              {1} represents the Unity of
DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                                2688                                        Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
                                                                                                               C. Giannantoni


                                the System (understood as a Whole), with specific reference to the Unity of its
                                Proper Space (as well as its Relational Space).
                                    Such a Fundamental Unit can be then expressed by the following Relationship
                                                                           α  i ⊕ β  j + γ ⊕ k}
                                                                  {1} = e{                                           (A2.4)

                                    Consequently, the Ordinal Roots           ( {1} ) will be represented in the fol-
                                                                               N −1
                                                                                             l

                                lowing form
                                                                            {α  i ⊕ β  j +γ ⊕ k}
                                                                 {1} = e
                                                                     l
                                                                                      N −1
                                                                                                                      (A2.5)

                                where:
                                • i, j , k are the fundamental spinors of the Relational Space [26] [38], which
                                                                        
                                  replace the traditional versors i , j , k , understood in their more general
                                    sense, that is, as the specific foundation of any given System;
                                •    α , β , γ are respectively equal to
                                                              4π ⋅ l            2π ⋅ l            2π ⋅ l
                                                    α= ε1 +          , β= ε 2 +        e γ= ε 3 +                     (A2.6)
                                                              N −1              N −1              N −1
                                • where the “periodicity” of the “spinor” i is equal to 4π , because expressed
                                  in steradians;
                                • while the periodicity of the spinors j e k are both equal to 2π radiants
                                  (each), because these spinors are always “orthogonal”, both between them,
                                  and with respect to the spinor i (an orthogonality that can be understood,
                                    inter alia, as a form of reciprocal “irreducibility”);
                                • the quantities ε1 , ε 2 , ε 3 represent specific “parameters” of the Relational Space
                                    each time considered, with specific reference to the “couple 12”.
                                    Sometimes (for example in the case of Protein Folding), for an easier “topo-
                                logical” representation Equation (A2.6) can also represented as
                                               α    ε + 4π ⋅ l    β    ε + 2π ⋅ l    γ    ε + 2π ⋅ l
                                                   = 1         ,      = 2         ,      = 3                          (A2.7)
                                              N −1     N −1      N −1     N −1      N −1     N −1
                                which however can always re-proposed in the previous form (A2.6) through an
                                appropriate choice of the parameters ε1 , ε 2 , ε 3 .
                                    On the basis of the previous exposition, it should be even clearer that the
                                Harmony Relationships represent an “Irreducible Excess”, that is an “Exceeding”
                                Manifestation of a Generative System, which, at the same time, is Self-Organizing,
                                of Ordinal Nature, and, above all, is understood as a Whole from the very begin-
                                ning, and not vice versa.




DOI: 10.4236/jamp.2022.109178                         2689                         Journal of Applied Mathematics and Physics
